# Preface to the Paperback Edition

Preface to the Paperback Edition
================================

PRUFROCK AVOIDED
================

*That is not it at all.  
That is not what I meant, at all.*—T. S. ELIOT, *The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock*

In January 2007, I stood in an upstairs ballroom of the Palmer House Hotel in Chicago, preparing to speak to a group of high school administrators. One hundred copies of *The Difference* lay stacked nearby on a catering table. Officially, the book had yet to be released, so this was, in effect, its coming out party. As I stared at the uncracked spines, I pondered the book’s reception. Would people get it? Or would I spend the next few years quoting T. S. Eliot?

Happily, Prufrock has been avoided.

Not that I didn’t have my moments of doubt. Initial readings were all over the map. Some in the blogosphere characterized the book as Jim Suroweicki’s *Wisdom of Crowds* on steroids. Others framed it as a book about affirmative action. Still others said it described a portfolio model of people. My wife assured me that these were proof of my theory—evidence of diverse perspectives in action. I was less certain and dusted off my Eliot to work on cadence.

Perhaps because *The Difference* takes time to digest, eventually, accurate readings won out. Reviewers recognized that *The Difference* explores the pragmatic, bottom-line contributions of diversity. It does so using models and logic, not metaphor. The book’s claims that “collective ability equals individual ability plus diversity” and that “diversity trumps ability” are mathematical truths, not feel-good mantras.

Diversity, as characterized in the book, means differences in how people see, categorize, understand, and go about improving the world. I should hasten to add that the book’s emphasis on cognitive diversity and the pragmatic benefits of diversity does not deny other dimensions of diversity. Those exist, and they matter. In fact, identity diversity and cognitive diversity often go hand in hand. Two people belonging to different identity groups, or with different life experiences, also tend to acquire diverse cognitive tools.

Unfortunately, rather than leverage those differences to our collective benefit, we often allow our differences to impede progress and innovation. When confronted with someone who looks or acts differently, many of us tend to recoil. Soon after the initial publication of *The Difference,* Robert Putnam released results from a large survey that demonstrated the scale of this negative response to diversity. He found that levels of civic engagement and trust decreased as communities became more diverse. Note that in his case, diversity means ethnic diversity.

His raw data painted a bleak picture. People in diverse neighborhoods not only trusted people belonging to other ethnic groups less, they trusted everyone less. Not good. Reality may not be as bleak as Putnam’s most publicized graphs seem to imply, however. After he takes into account control variables—crime, income, city size, educational attainment, etc.—the negative effects of diversity decrease substantially.

But the media saw Putnam’s work and mine as contradictory: “Putnam says diversity is bad. Page says diversity is good.” The juxtaposition was ill posed. Putnam had done survey research. I had written theoretical models. Putnam was asking people about trust and happiness. I was constructing models of collective productivity, accuracy, and innovation. He was asking, do we get along? I was analyzing whether diverse teams make better mousetraps.

Interacting with a large number of diverse people should be more cognitively taxing than hanging out with your close friends, who look, think, and act just like you. Situated in a diverse polyglot, people may indeed feel the need to hunker down (to use Putnam’s phrase). Even so, they probably do not fully insulate themselves. They cannot avoid having their world view a bit more exposed to new ways of seeing and thinking, and as a result they cannot help but become a bit more productive. Thus, we should expect members of diverse communities, cities, and nations to be more productive, even if they are less trusting.

One might think, and I certainly do, that if we can be made more trusting, then we would become even more productive. The University of Michigan, where I teach, has a mission to improve society. Hence, it devotes time, energy, and resources to helping students, faculty, and staff learn to thrive in a diverse, interactive university community. Many other organizations do the same. Practice may not always make perfect, but it usually improves the imperfect.

Since the publication of the book, I have been involved in a number of discussions and conferences taking up the more practical issue of leveraging diversity. Leveraging diversity isn’t easy. In theory, given the right conditions, two heads will be better than one, but in practice, team members don’t always get along, and even when they do, outcomes can be lousy. We’ve all heard the story of the committee tasked with building a horse, but built a camel instead.

A good starting point for thinking about how to leverage diversity is to recognize (and then often restructure) the nature of the task. The organizational theorist I. D. Steiner distinguished between *disjunctive tasks,* those in which only one person needs to succeed for the group to be successful, and *conjunctive tasks,* those in which everyone’s contribution is critical. Solving a vexing math problem is disjunctive: the more diverse heads, the better. In football, the offensive line’s task of protecting the quarterback is conjunctive. If any one lineman fails to do his job, the quarterback gets sacked. Diversity works best on disjunctive tasks because multiple approaches can be tried simultaneously, and one good idea means success for everyone.

Most real world tasks are neither purely disjunctive nor purely conjunctive. In fact, how much of each a particular task is depends upon how the task is structured. As the economic historian Paul David pointed out to me, one of the great challenges in constructing distributed organizations is transforming conjunctive tasks into disjunctive tasks. For example, success in open-source software development requires an initial template that modularizes the problem into a collection of disjunctive parts.

Moving from a theoretical science of distributed and collective intelligence to the practical art of distributed, decentralized organizations requires additional conceptual unpacking. Take the case of what is often called distributed information production. Examples of this include Wikipedia, Digg.com, and Epinions. For these collective projects to take off, knowledge must be dispersely held, people must have incentives to reveal their information, a significant percentage of the information must be useful, and biases and errors must be identifiable and correctable. Wikipedia has been such a smashing success because it meets all of these requirements. Information about the world is widely held. Contributing is easy. Most of the information is useful and accurate, and mistakes can be identified and corrected by editors at Wikipedia.

Prediction markets, where collections of employees or individuals bet on future outcomes, provide a second application of the ideas in *The Difference.* Prediction markets work best when many variables could potentially influence the outcome and when quantifying relevant information proves difficult. Participants must be both accurate and diverse for prediction markets to work. In some cases, sufficient diversity already exists. In other instances, it must be recruited or incentivized.

Prediction markets get lots of attention (it’s cool that the Iowa Electronic Market predicts elections so well), but distributed problem solving—in the academy, the government, and the corporate sector—may be the more important application of diversity. Distributed problem solving allows a problem to be investigated simultaneously by a population of people with diverse tools. An example of this is the now famous Goldcorp challenge, in which the company made public all relevant information about its Red Lake Mine in Ontario, Canada. It broadcast this information over the Web and asked for advice as to where to dig. The result was, literally, golden. Contestants identified over fifty new sites. More than three-fourths of these produced gold. Similarly, Netflix, the movie distribution company, recently made all of its information about user preferences publicly available and offered a million dollars to anyone who could improve on a baseline algorithm for making movie recommendations by 10 percent.

Distributed problem solving can be thought of as a form of innovation. This opening up of innovation activities to users is sometimes called *distributed co-creation.* The diverse toolboxes that people bring to problems enable large populations to produce novel breakthroughs. Examples include Lego.com, which encourages users to design their own products, and the T-shirt company Threadless, which allows anyone to design T-shirts. In each case, the best designs get produced and sold, with the designers sharing in the profits. Perhaps most germane to the subject of diversity, the Open Prosthetics Project ([www.openprosthetics.org](http://www.openprosthetics.org)) enlists amputees to help design artificial limbs. The amputees bring perspectives to problems that limbed people do not possess, such as what features will function well for rock climbing.

I have often been asked, when do distributed problem solving and innovation work? I think we’re still in the process of figuring that out, but we have some ideas. An organization must have some sense that improvement is possible, that it’s stuck or locked into a few perspectives. It must also believe that people with relevant perspectives and heuristics exist who could be encouraged to think about the problem. Ideally, the problem itself will be both quantifiable and modularizable. Also, there must exist some fast, low-cost, effective way to compare solutions. And, finally, the act of stating the problem cannot give away valuable information, such as cost structures or proprietary data. Netflix could encrypt the names of users and movies, driving the value of the information down to zero. Goldcorp could not encrypt their data, but they were safe because they owned the mine.

When those conditions aren’t met, decentralized problem solving or co-creation may well fail. The Schaumburg Flyers, a minor league baseball team, found out the hard way. For the second half of the 2006 season, the owners allowed fans to manage the team. Fans voted on batting order, pitching decisions, etc. The failure of this attempt should come as no surprise. The members of the crowd knew little about the players, nor was there any filter to limit participation to those taking the task seriously. Add to this the fact that feedback was slow and noisy, and that fourth-place finish was unavoidable.

When decentralized problem solving and innovation do succeed, one can ask whether diversity deserves credit. In a few cases, we can look at the sequence of improvements and see the residue of diverse perspectives and heuristics in action and say with some degree of confidence that diversity deserves credit. The MATLAB programming contest provides just such an example. The contest works as follows: MATLAB proposes a computational problem. It could be gene sequencing, the traveling salesperson’s problem (see pages 56–59), or solving Sudoku. Contestants write computer code in MATLAB to solve the problem in minimal time with maximal efficiency. Solutions have to be fast and correct. MATLAB engineers test the code and post both the results and the code itself, allowing other contestants to build off existing code.

This transparency allows contestants to apply their diverse skills to produce improvement. Not surprisingly, analysis of the results reveals diverse perspectives and heuristics at work. In one instance, someone knew a faster way to produce the Fibonacci sequence (see page 42), a better heuristic. Applying this heuristic decreases the computation time. In other instances, someone brings an entirely new approach—a new perspective on the problem—resulting in a dramatic improvement in efficiency.

A final key determinant in the success of decentralized organizational forms is culture. Culture has hundreds of definitions. Here, I mean norms and modes of behavior. We should not be surprised that distributed approaches have succeeded in open-source software and in the ATLAS project in physics. Both of these communities have norms of sharing and collaboration. The future success of distributed cognition depends partly on the spread of positive-sum thinking. We have to think of sharing ideas not as giving away the shop, but as collectively building the lever to lift the world.
