# CHAPTER 12

CHAPTER 12
==========

The Causes of Cognitive Diversity
=================================

FAMILY VACATIONS, COLLEGE, OR IDENTITY?
=======================================

*I don’t know if I think the way I do because I am a physicist or if I am a physicist because of the way I think*.

—KEN HAAS

THE time has come to look at the evidence, to see whether toolbox diversity improves problem solving and prediction, and to see whether fundamental preference diversity leads to conflict and frustration. Time and space permit only so much, but we don’t need much of either. The evidence speaks clearly: *diversity produces benefits* (cognitively diverse societies, cities, and teams perform better than more homogenous ones), *fundamental preference diversity creates problems* (public goods are underprovided and people don’t get along), and, finally, *collections of people with diverse cognitive toolboxes and diverse fundamental preferences have higher-variance performance* (they locate better outcomes and produce more conflict). As identity diverse collections of people often contain both types of diversity, they perform both better and worse than homogenous groups as well. Put differently, identity diverse teams, cities, and societies *can* perform better, but they often fail to do so. These findings all agree with the models. To think different is good. To want differently isn’t, at least not necessarily.

As we move forward, it is important to note that we are not testing the logical truth of the models. The models hold up mathematically, just as the equation 5+4 = 9 does, regardless of whether empirical evidence supports them. We’re interested in whether the hypotheses and insights developed in these stark models shed any light on the complex multifaceted real worlds in which we live. Before we begin, two caveats are in order. First, the models that we covered do not provide the only candidate explanations for the empirical phenomena we discuss. Other models might better explain some or all of these empirical regularities. Second, even if the evidence does align with the models, it need not always do so: social scientific facts are temporal regularities. Boys may score better than girls on tests of verbal skills in one decade and worse in another. A tax rebate may have a large effect on spending at one point in time and no effect in another. We can contrast these with facts about the physical world, which remain fixed. The water molecules streaming from your faucet contain two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. They will tomorrow. And they will next year as well.

Before we can make sense of the empirical evidence, we need a better understanding of the causes of cognitive diversity. That’s our mission in this brief chapter—to explain what causes cognitive diversity. Without this understanding, we have no way of distinguishing between cognitively homogeneous and cognitively diverse groups. In this chapter, we discuss two direct causes, training and experiences, and one indirect one, identities. The direct causes require no justification and the indirect one requires only a little. We’ll ignore genetics, not because genes don’t matter. They do.[1](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn1) Genes even correlate, however slightly, with identity classifications such as ethnicity and gender.[2](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn2)

We will leave out genes because compared to training, experience, and identity, genes play a minor role. Let’s allow them briefly to strut and fret and then be heard no more. The case against genes begins with the advice given to young Benjamin Braddock (Dustin Hoffman) in *The Graduate:* “plastics.” Our brains possess amazing plasticity—both in structure and function. Neuroscientists have only just begun to understand the former, but they do know that as we learn, we physically alter the structure of our brain. Thinking is weight lifting for the mind. Just as curling weights builds our biceps, so does thinking spatially build our hippocampi.[3](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn3) Juggling develops both biceps *and* hippocampi.[4](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn4)

This plasticity decreases with time, which increases ethnic and cultural effects. Try as we might, we cannot escape our parents— not just their genes, but all of those other effects they had. This functional plasticity provides one reason for ignoring genetics: *our genes differ little from those of our ancestors of a few hundred years ago, but our cognitive tools differ markedly*. Our ancestors did not know about DNA, bacteria, or viruses. They did not know about the elements, molecules, or atoms, let alone quarks or muons. They did not know the conservation laws from physics. They did not know about electricity, evolution, plate tectonics, or carbon cycles. They did not know calculus. They did not know either Pascal—the man or the computer language. They had similar genes but different toolboxes.

A second reason for ignoring genes relies on economics, preferences, and combinatorics. Think back to the example of Bobbi and Carl and their cognitive toolboxes. Let’s make the strongest case we can for genes playing a role in the number and type of tools that they acquire. Bobbi might be genetically predisposed to acquire some tools more easily than Carl does and some tools less easily. These differences could be thought of as determining their costs of acquiring different tools. Their genes might also influence their total budget—how many tools they can acquire. Thus Carl and Bobbi face different prices and have different budgets. We could apply the logic of Economics 101 and think that we’d get fairly accurate predictions about their purchases. For example, suppose Bobbi has twenty dollars and can buy science tools for one dollar apiece and artistic tools for two dollars. And suppose Carl has eighteen dollars and can buy science tools for two dollars apiece and artistic tools for one dollar. Can we then expect Bobbi to acquire more science tools than Carl? No. We cannot. If Carl likes science and Bobbi likes art, he’ll buy more science tools. They have billions and billions of possible choices. The supermarket of tools is so large that other factors swamp the price effects (the impact of latent abilities). Therefore, we can hardly avoid taking an anti-essentialism approach and assume that human potential varies little across people or across identity groups.[5](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn5)

TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE
-----------------------

Let’s first consider how training and experience cause cognitive diversity. Strong relationships exist in both cases. People trained differently acquire different cognitive tools. Someone trained as an actuary learns different cognitive tools—different perspectives, interpretations, and heuristics than someone trained as a doctor or as a lawyer. Two people who have different experiences also develop different toolboxes. A city-dwelling banker acquires tools such as navigating a transportation system and balancing a stock portfolio. A farmer learns quite different tools, perhaps even balancing on a transportation system (a horse) and navigating stock, tools that the banker has no incentive to acquire.

We begin with the obvious link between training and cognitive tools. Much of schooling consists of the accumulation of perspectives: polar and Cartesian coordinates, and even rational trigonometry. Children also learn heuristics—lots of them. They learn to diagram sentences. They learn to deconstruct arguments and plots. They learn how to hold a paintbrush and how to draw lines to capture movement. As they get older, children learn more general heuristics that they can apply across contexts. They learn that they can tie themselves to the mast like Odysseus (often a good idea). They learn that, like Cortez, they can burn their ships behind them to create a strong commitment to move forward. (My lingering sadness about having sold my 1985 Toyota Land Cruiser compels me to recommend following Cortez only in extreme circumstances.)

Training influences our interpretations—the boxes we use to categorize what we see and learn. When we learn about magnetism, we gain an interpretation that separates objects into two boxes: one labeled magnetic and the other labeled not magnetic. Training also contributes to the set of predictive models that we carry around in our heads. These can be simple predictive models or more elaborate ones based on the theory of evolution or the law of conservation of energy. The examples we’ve given have been limited to educational training, but training does not end in school. Our training continues through life. Those best-selling books to the contrary, we do not learn everything we need to know (the perspective, heuristics, categorizations, and predictive models) in kindergarten. We don’t even learn them all in college.

The causal relationship between training and preference diversity pulls in both directions. Diverse preferences can lead to diverse training, and diverse training can lead to diverse preferences. The first causal relationship also applies to fundamental preferences. What we fundamentally desire influences how we choose to be trained. The second causal relationship applies to instrumental preferences. Training changes our instrumental preferences by providing us with more tools—more ways of seeing the world and deeper understandings of causality. This increased cognitive depth and breadth enables us to see situations, events, and problems differently and, we hope, more productively. We choose different means to ends than we would have without training.

I do not mean to suggest that all training is equal. Memorizing long lists of unrelated facts is far less valuable than accumulating tools and understandings. Training in core skills and understandings is necessary. A person cannot accumulate a sophisticated and diverse toolbox without some foundations: knowledge of basic mathematics, an understanding of the fundamental laws of physics and chemistry, knowledge of various interpretations of great works in literature, and an understanding of important events in history. People should learn deeply *and* differently. Otherwise, collectively we won’t be able to solve problems and make predictions.

We next turn to experience. We learn cognitive tools that help us make sense of our experiences. If confronted with different sets of experiences, we likely acquire and develop different tool sets to succeed in our endeavors: many people who live near water learn the tools required to fish. Desert dwellers have little need for such tools. Experience also shapes the attributes we use in our interpretations and our predictive models. A person who has dropped and broken a laptop computer considers the durability of his next purchase.

The process of developing a model requires structuring our experiences in categories. And the problem of choosing the best set of attributes for a given predictive task (of creating the Soccer Mom category) has been shown to be difficult in a formal sense.[6](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn6) Thus, we should not expect people to find the best possible predictive model. And even if people could find the best model, it might not be unique. More than one predictive model may be consistent with experiences, as we saw in Screening Success.[7](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn7)

History offers many examples of predictive model refinement. Fifty years ago, a fair percentage of doctors performed tonsillectomies on children with mildly recurrent sore throats. Now, few do. We should not take an entirely optimistic view of how we learn from experience. As teachers go, experience counts among the harshest. We learn some of life’s most valuable lessons—to bring lots of water on hikes, to leave plenty of time to get to the airport, and to wear protection (in the rain)—the hard way. To give just one example, in the 1980s, the Coca-Cola Corporation attempted to replace Coke with what they called New Coke. New Coke outperformed the original Coke in blind taste tests, yet the public response to New Coke was harsh and swift. People hated it. Not the taste—they liked the taste. They hated the idea of tampering with an American icon. The Coca-Cola Corporation had the wrong predictive model. They had categorized Coke as a consumer product that people drank because of its taste. They quickly learned—consumers held rallies demanding the return of the original Coke—that Coke occupies a special place in American culture, and not to mess with the secret formula.

Experience can also affect both types of preference diversity. Experience influences the creation of predictive models, so it has a direct effect on instrumental preferences. Experience can also change our fundamental preferences. Often, the more we experience something, the more we like it. Children learn to enjoy food that they eat frequently. With repeated interactions, people even learn to like others who made bad initial impressions.[8](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn8) On the flip side, familiarity can breed contempt. Either way, experiences affect preferences.

Finally, much of our creative thinking relies on analogies.[9](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn9) This implies a central role for experiential diversity in creating cognitive diversity. In his introductory physics lectures, Richard Feynman claims that people have difficulty understanding the principles of modern physics because our everyday experiences provide us with no good analogies. We experience Newtonian physics. We can see how force equals mass times acceleration. Seeing is both believing and understanding. That’s why Newton’s laws make so much sense to us and that’s why quantum mechanics seems so obscure. We don’t experience many quantum effects, or at least, we’re not aware of them. If some group of people had quantumlike experiences, if they saw things that existed in probabilistic waves that only became particles when observed, these people would probably make good physicists—provided that they also acquired all of the necessary mathematical heuristics.

IDENTITY
--------

The importance of analogies in creative thinking provides an entry into a brief discussion of the role of identity differences in creating cognitive differences. Our cultures are part of our identity. Cultures contain stories. These stories can provide the basis for understanding and analogies. Cultures also contain languages and perspectives. We hold onto our cultural traits so long as we connect to people who share them. Sometimes this comes at an economic cost.[10](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn10)

Evidence that cultures influence the perspectives and heuristics that people develop takes many forms.[11](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn11) When looking at a fish tank, people from Eastern countries tend to notice patterns in the swimming fish, and people from Western countries more often notice individual fish. When asked to identify a person as happy or sad, people from Western countries less often take into account the happiness of surrounding people.[12](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn12)

Everyday routines and rituals create differences in how our brains are structured. Abundant evidence shows that societies develop tools and representations necessary for their survival and success. Not that they always succeed. Some societies collapse.[13](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn13) Consider an example from Ed Hutchins’s book *Cognition in the Wild*. Micronesians rely on a navigational perspective that confounds most outsiders. Their perspective assumes their boats to be fixed in the water. Rather than seeing the boat move toward an island, they see the islands move past the boat. As islands pass, the navigator knows his location. Micronesians have even invented imaginary islands to help them know their location. Imagine getting in your car and driving from Ohio to Georgia and having a Micronesian in the backseat. Whereas you might say, “We’re now driving over the Ohio River and entering Kentucky,” the Micronesian would say, “The Ohio River just passed underneath the car and Kentucky is heading right at us.” One can only imagine what fun it would be to teach geometry to Micronesians.

Cultural differences exist, to be sure, but they may be swamped by the variation that exists within cultures. Our identities also include our races, genders, physical abilities, sexual orientations, religions, and even our training. Some of these characteristics are socially constructed (race and gender); others (sex) are biological. The socially constructed attributes can be hard to pin down. Race can be defined externally (how others see us), internally (how we see ourselves), and expressively (how we present ourselves to others).[14](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn14) Sometimes all three of these line up. Sometimes they don’t. For decades, the movie star Raquel Welch presented herself as Anglo and was perceived as Anglo, but internally she felt Latina. Only recently have all three of her constructed identities aligned.

Attributes such as race shape our experiences. They limit, steer, and even guide our choices. Thus, identity attributes cause us to construct different sets of cognitive tools. Sometimes these are not chosen so much as forced on us. So to think that people possess the traits that they do because they are somehow essential, somehow determined by their identities, is to commit what psychologists call a fundamental attribution error. Just because someone slips and falls does not mean that she is clumsy. It could mean that her front porch is icy. Similarly, just because someone thinks a certain way does not imply a genetic link. His way of thought could have been influenced more by his environment than by his genes. Thus, we cannot attribute difference to essential differences unless environments are the same.

Though identity matters, we cannot equate individual tools or collections of tools with specific identities. We can expect, however, that identity differences lead to experiential differences that in turn create tool differences. We can see this in the context of gender differences. Most people treat and react to men and women differently. Almost anyone would be frightened more by a six-foot-four-inch, two-hundred-sixty-pound man than by a five-foot-one-inch, one-hundred-two-pound woman. This makes logical sense. The man can probably inflict more physical punishment. If you meet the man in a dark alley, you might run in fear. If you meet the woman, you might feel protective of her. Of course, not all men are larger than all women. Many women are taller than lots of men. The basketball star Lisa Leslie is taller than all but a small percentage of men. Nevertheless, the average man is more physically imposing than the average woman, and he’s more violent. Here’s the point: because we treat men and women differently, we provide them with different experiences. As a result, they learn to think about situations differently.[15](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn15)

Men and women may differ in the tools they choose to acquire, yet this does not in any way imply that they differ in the perspectives, heuristics, interpretations, and predictive models that they *could* acquire. More men than woman study physics. And more women than men learn to crochet. But, even at Harvard, women earn A’s in physics. And some men learn to be surgical nurses (though not many). Even though women dominate some professions, such as elementary school teacher and veterinarian, men are capable of doing these jobs as well.

The effects of identity on experience and opportunities are hard to measure. But almost no one disputes that they are large. The relevant question for us is whether those differences translate into meaningful cognitive differences—different perspectives, interpretations, heuristics, and predictive models. The answer to that question depends on context. If we’re trying to solve problems of poverty, we cannot but think that the answer is yes. Someone who has been poor or whose extended family and friends include poor people probably brings useful understandings to the table, and so does a good statistician. If we’re trying to solve a problem in chemistry or physics, the answer becomes less clear. On the one hand, we shouldn’t expect race or gender or anything else to matter too much. On the other hand, people reason by analogy or from experience. People belonging to different identity groups pull from different wells of experience.

Ideally, society would not discriminate based on identity characteristics. But even if a society did not, policies that encourage or mandate identity blindness could not immediately overcome the residue of past biases. Science has long been predominantly male. As a result, science has become infused with masculine features—think of all of the dropping, crashing, and exploding that takes place in a physics or chemistry classroom. Some have claimed that if we taught physics and chemistry in a more feminine way—through cooking (note the stereotyping)—we’d attract more women scientists.[16](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn16) John Dewey, by the way, taught science through cooking at his Lab School at the University of Chicago.[17](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn17)

Further, even if we did achieve gender, color, and cultural blindness and treated everyone equally, that would not mean that people from different identity groups would not differentiate themselves in ways that affect their cognitive tools. Even in a colorblind society, we would still expect identity differences to correlate with some cognitive differences. Not that color blindness is itself well defined. Many of us can look past skin color but cannot look past scarves and cornrows.

Let’s get precise about what these differences might be. To capture differences in interpretations, a tool in our toolbox, anthropologists and sociologists use something called *pile sorting*. This technique captures differences in how people represent things.[18](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn18) Here’s how it works. People are asked to sort a list of familiar items—types of food, plants, or animals—into piles. Pile sorting can also reveal cognitive differences created by experience or training. Suppose that you are given the following list of people and asked to sort them into piles.

* Gerald Ford
* George H. W. Bush
* Madonna
* Jodie Foster

Most people would create two piles. They’d put the two former presidents in one pile and the two entertainers in the other. But in two small subcultures, one located in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and the other in New Haven, Connecticut, the piles would differ. These people would put the two University of Michigan undergraduates, Madonna and Gerald Ford, in one pile and the two Yalies, George H. W. Bush and Jodie Foster, in the other.[19](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn19)

People who grow up in different cultures create different piles, though not everyone in the same culture creates the same piles. We won’t find a “French pile sort” of a list of food items, but we will find strong similarities in the piles that French people produce. The French probably find snails more similar to shrimp than Americans do. In many cases, this distribution of piles has small variance— the collection of piles are relatively similar.

Empirical evidence shows that people who construct different ways of life also construct different interpretations and perspectives. This can result in different predictive models and should create incentives for learning different heuristics. Scott Atran and Douglas Medin have identified cultural differences in the cognitive maps for the Itza’, Ladino, and Q’eche living in the Guatemalan lowlands. What Atran and Medin call *cognitive maps* we could call *predictive models*. These predictive models influence how they manage resources.[20](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn20) Psychologists can plot features of these cognitive maps, but that doesn’t mean that people can easily learn to think like someone from a different culture. That takes time and effort, just as learning how to think like a chemist would take some time.

SERENDIPITY
-----------

Surely, then, our diverse training, experiences, and identities cause us to think differently. They cause us to have distinct cognitive tools. Even so, we have to be aware that we cannot know beforehand which person’s tools will prove up to a given task. Many breakthroughs seem to be serendipitous.[21](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn21) Serendipity implies more than mere luck. A person’s ability to contribute improves if she can see a problem in multiple ways and if she can apply diverse heuristics.[22](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn22) As Louis Pasteur wrote, “Chance favors the prepared mind.” Newton, Curie, Edison, and Aristotle were, by any measure, prepared.

Serendipity would seem to be too elusive to model. Yet, the frameworks in this book deepen our understanding and appreciation of Pasteur’s comment in particular and of serendipity in general. An event may create opportunity only for those minds representing the event in particular ways. Insights are often the recognition of a previously ignored dimension or causal relationship. They are new interpretations and new predictive models.

The invention of the phonograph is an example of a prepared mind seeing an event differently. Edison had been designing a device that could play back Morse code automatically. He noticed that the needle running across the spinning disk on his machine made a humming sound. The leap from the obscure humming to the reproduction of voice was then but a small step for Edison. Lots of things hummed. Only Edison thought deeply about what was causing the humming of his spinning disk and stumbled on the phonograph. His mind was prepared and he noticed a dimension (the humming) and a causal relationship that others had missed.

We need not go all the way back to Edison. Steven Jobs, the founder of Apple, took calligraphy courses in college. That experience taught him to care about fonts—something other designers ignored. Sometimes serindipity allows someone to directly apply an idea from the past to a current problem. Tom Plaskett, once the head of marketing for American Airlines, applied an idea he learned as a child in Raytown, Missouri: people like *getting something for nothing*. His mother was an avid collector of S&H Green Stamps. She traded her stamps for gifts. Plaskett took the Green Stamp idea and applied it to airlines. The result: frequent flier programs.[23](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn23)

Insights can come even from dreams. Nearly one hundred years ago, W. A. Kaempferrt described Elias Howe’s invention of the sewing machine as follows.

Howe had been making the needles of his early failures with a hole in the middle of the shank. His brain was busy with the invention day and night and even when he slept. One night, he dreamed that savages captured him and took him before their monarch.

“Elias Howe,” roared the monarch, “I command you on pain of death to finish this machine at once.”

Cold sweat poured down his brow, his hands shook with fear, his knees quaked. Try as he would, the inventor could not get the missing figure in the problem over which he had worked so long. All this was so real to him that he cried aloud. In the vision he saw himself surrounded by dark-skinned and painted warriors, who formed a hollow square about him and led him to the place of execution. Suddenly he noticed that near the heads of the spears which his guards carried, there were eye-shaped holes! He had solved the secret! What he needed was a needle with an eye near the point! He awoke from his dream, sprang out of bed, and at once made a whittled model of the eye-pointed needle, with which he brought his experiments to a successful close.[24](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn24)

Breathe deeply and put aside Howe’s horrible reference to the dark-skinned warriors and all that they might represent in the recesses of Howe’s psyche. Instead, look at this as another instance of the Costanza “do the opposite” heuristic leading to a breakthrough. Sewing needles have holes at their blunt ends. Sewing machines needed holes at their pointy ends. In his horrible dream, this insight became clear to Howe. This anecdote would seem to imply that our diverse experiences can work in the recesses of our minds, that we can derive new insights and connections even during sleep. This is true. Elias Howe was not the only person ever to solve a problem while sleeping. Scientific evidence shows that sleep helps us think.[25](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn25) These studies provide yet another reason to expose yourself to diverse ideas. Your brain may connect them to the difficult problems you’re contemplating.

Almost by definition, breakthroughs require serendipity. That serendipity arises from diverse preparedness. It derives from someone noticing and knowing how to interpret strange phenomena. Albert Einstein wrote that “the most beautiful thing we can experience is the mysterious. It is the source of all true art and science.”[26](9781400830282_epub_nts_r1.htm#c12-ftn26) In trying to come to grips with those mysteries, we apply our tools. The more tools we amass through training, refine by experience, and filter through our identities, the better.
