# Auto Chapter 1

How to Solve It This page intentionally left blank How to Solve It A New Aspect of Mathematical Method G. POLYA With a new foreword by john H. Conway Princeton University Press Princeton and Oxford Copyright© 1945 by Princeton University Press Copyright© renewed 1973 by Princeton University Press Second Edition Copyright© 1957 by G. Polya Second Edition Copyright © renewed 1985 by Princeton University Press All Rights Reserved First Princeton Paperback printing, 1971 Second printing, 1973 First Princeton Science Library Edition, 1988 Expanded Princeton Science Library Edition, with a new foreword by John H . Conway, 2004 Library of Congress Control Number 2004100613 ISBN-13: 978-0-691-11966-3 (pbk.) ISBN-10: 0-691-11966-X (pbk.) British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available Printed on acid-free paper. oo psi. princeton.edu Printed in the United States of America 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 From the Preface to the First Printing A great discovery solves a great problem but there is a grain of discovery in the solution of any problem. Your problem may be modest; but if it challenges your curios ity and brings into play your inventive faculties, and if you solve it by your own means, you may experience the tension and enjoy the triumph of discovery. Such experi ences at a susceptible age may create a taste for mental work and leave their imprint on mind and character for a lifetime. Thus, a teacher of mathematics has a great opportu nity. If he fills his allotted time with drilling his students in routine operations he kills their interest, hampers their intellectual development, and misuses his oppor tunity. But if he challenges the curiosity of his students by setting them problems proportionate to their knowl edge, and helps them to solve their problems with stimu lating questions, he may give them a taste for, and some means of, independent thinking. Also a student whose college curriculum includes some mathematics has a singular opportunity. This opportu nity is lost, of course, if he regards mathematics as a subject in which he has to earn so and so much credit and which he should forget after the final examination as quickly as possible. The opportunity may be lost even if the student has some natural talent for mathematics because he, as everybody else, must discover his talents and tastes; he cannot know that he likes raspberry pie if he has never tasted raspberry pie. He may manage to find out, however, that a mathematics problem may be as much fun as a crossword puzzle, or that vigorous mental v vi From the Preface to the First Printing work may be an exercise as desirable as a fast game of tennis. Having tasted the pleasure in mathematics he will not forget it easily and then there is a good chance that mathematics will become something for him: a hobby, or a tool of his profession, or his profession, or a great ambition. The author remembers the time when he was a student himself, a somewhat ambitious student, eager to under stand a little mathematics and physics. He listened to lectures, read books, tried to take in the solutions and facts presented, but there was a question that disturbed him again and again: "Yes, the solution seems to work, it appears to be correct; but how is it possible to invent such a solution? Yes, this experiment seems to work, this appears to be a fact; but how can people discover such facts? And how could I invent or discover such things by myself?" Today the author is teaching mathematics in a university; he thinks or hopes that some of his more eager students ask similar questions and he tries to satisfy their curiosity. Trying to understand not only the solution of this or that problem but also the motives and procedures of the solution, and trying to explain these motives and procedures to others, he was finally led to write the present book. He hopes that it will be useful to teachers who wish to develop their students' ability to solve prob lems, and to students who are keen on developing their own abilities. Although the present book pays special attention to the requirements of students and teachers of mathematics, it should interest anybody concerned with the ways and means of invention and discovery. Such interest may be more widespread than one would assume without reflec tion. The space devoted by popular newspapers and magazines to crossword puzzles and other riddles seems to show that people spend some time in solving unprac- From the Preface to the First Printing vii tical problems. Behind the desire to solve this or that problem that confers no material advantage, there may be a deeper curiosity, a desire to understand the ways and means, the motives and procedures, of solution. The following pages are written somewhat concisely, but as simply as possible, and are based on a long and serious study of methods of solution. This sort of study, called heuristic by some writers, is not in fashion now adays but has a long past and, perhaps, some future. Studying the methods of solving problems, we perceive another face of mathematics. Yes, mathematics has two faces; it is the rigorous science of Euclid but it is also something else. Mathematics presented in the Euclidean way appears as a systematic, deductive science; but mathe matics in the making appears as an experimental, in ductive science. Both aspects are as old as the science of mathematics itself. But the second aspect is new in one respect; mathematics "in statu nascendi," in the process of being invented, has never before been presented in quite this manner to the student, or to the teacher him self, or to the general public. The subject of heuristic has manifold connections; mathematicians, logicians, psychologists, educationalists, even philosophers may claim various parts of it as belong ing to their special domains. The author, well aware of the possibility of criticism from opposite quarters and keenly conscious of his limitations, has one claim to make: he has some experience in solving problems and in teaching mathematics on various levels. The subject is more fully dealt with in a more exten sive book by the author which is on the way to com pletion. Stanford University, August I, I944 viii From the Preface to the Seventh Printing From the Preface to the Seventh Printing I am glad to say that I have now succeeded in fulfilling, at least in part, a promise given in the preface to the first printing: The two volumes Induction and Analogy in Mathematics and Patterns of Plausible Inference which constitute my recent work Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning continue the line of thinking begun in How to Solve It. Zurich, August ;o, I954 Preface to the Second Edition ix Preface to the Second Edition The present second edition adds, besides a few minor improvements, a new fourth part, "Problems, Hints, Solutions." As this edition was being prepared for print, a study appeared (Educational Testing Service, Princeton, N.J.; cf. Time, June 18, 1956) which seems to have formu lated a few pertinent observations-they are not new to the people in the know, but it was high time to formu late them for the general public-: " ... mathematics has the dubious honor of being the least popular subject in the curriculum . .. Future teachers pass through the elementary schools learning to detest mathematics . . . They return to the elementary school to teach a new generation to detest it." I hope that the present edition, designed for wider diffusion, will convince some of its readers that mathe matics, besides being a necessary avenue to engineering jobs and scientific knowledge, may be fun and may also open up a vista of mental activity on the highest level. Zurich, june 30, zg56 This page intentionally left blank Contents From the Preface to the First Printing From the Preface to the Seventh Printing Preface to the Second Edition "How to Solve It" list Foreword Introduction PART I. IN THE CLASSROOM Purpose 1. Helping the student 2. Questions, recommendations, mental operations 3· Generality 4· Common sense 5· Teacher and student. Imitation and practice Main divisions, main questions 6. Four phases 7· Understanding the problem 8. Example g. Devising a plan 10. Example 11. Carrying out the plan v viii IX xvi XIX XXV 1 1 2 3 3 5 6 7 8 10 12 13 14 16 19 20 22 33 xii Contents 12. Example 13· Looking back 14· Example 15· Various approaches 16. The teacher's method of questioning 17· Good questions and bad questions More examples 18. A problem of construction 19• A problem to prove 20. A rate problem PART II. HOW TO SOLVE IT A dialogue PART III. SHORT DICTIONARY OF HEURISTIC Analogy Auxiliary elements Auxiliary problem Bolzano Bright idea Can you check the result? Can you derive the result differently? Can you use the result? Carrying out Contents xiii Condition Con tradictoryt Corollary Could you derive something useful from the data? Could you restate the problem?t Decomposing and recombining Definition Descartes Determination, hope, success Diagnosis Did you use all the data? Do you know a related problem? Draw a figuret Examine your guess Figures Generalization Have you seen it before? Here is a problem related to yours and solved before Heuristic Heuristic reasoning If you cannot solve the proposed problem Induction and mathematical induction Inventor's paradox Is it possible to satisfy the condition? Leibnitz Lemma t Contains only cross-references. 7 2 7 3 73 73 75 75 85 92 93 94 95 98 99 99 103 108 110 1 1 o 112 113 114 114 121 122 123 123 xxv Contents Look at the unknown Modern heuristic Notation Pappus Pedantry and mastery Practical problems Problems to find, problems to prove Progress and achievement Puzzles Reductio ad absurdum and indirect proof Redundantt Routine problem Rules of discovery Rules of style Rules of teaching Separate the various parts of the condition Setting up equations Signs of progress Specialization Subconscious work Symmetry Terms, old and new Test by dimension The future mathematician The intelligent problem-solver The intelligent reader The traditional mathematics professor t Contains only cross-references. 123 129 134 141 148 149 154 157 160 162 171 171 172 172 173 173 174 178 190 197 199 200 202 Contents Variation of the problem What is the unknown? Why proofs? Wisdom of proverbs Working back wards XV 209 214 215 221 225 PART IV. PROBLEMS, HINTS, SOLUTIONS Problems Hints Solutions First. You have to understand the problem. Second. Find the connection between the data and the unknown. You may be obliged to consider auxiliary problems if an immediate connection cannot be found. You should obtain eventually a plan of the solution. HOW TO SOLVE IT UNDERSTANDING THE PROBLEM What is the unknown? What are the data? What is the condition? Is it possible to satisfy the condition? Is the condition sufficient to determine the unknown? Or is it insufficient? Or redundant? Or contradictory? Draw a figure. Introduce suitable notation. Separate the various parts of the condition. Can you write them down? DEVISING A PLAN Have you seen it before? Or have you seen the same problem in a slightly different form? Do you know a related problem? Do you know a theorem that could be useful? Look at the unknown! And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar unknown. Here is a problem related to yours and solved before. Could you use it7 Could you use its result? Could you use its method? Should you intro duce some auxiliary element in order to make its use possible? Could you restate the problem? Could you restate it still differently? Go back to definitions. ~- :;r: ~ 8" ~ 1f ;::;:. If you cannot solve the proposed problem try to solve first some related problem. Could you imagine a more accessible related problem? A more general problem? A more special problem? An analogous problem? Could you solve a part of the problem? Keep only a part of the condi tion, drop the other part; how far is the unknown then determined, how can it vary? Could you derive something useful from the data? Could you think of other data appropriate to determine the unknown? Could you change the unknown or the data, or both if necessary, so that the new unknown and the new data are nearer to each other? Did you use all the data? Did you use the whole condition? Have you taken into account all essential notions involved in the problem? Third. Carrying out your plan of the solution, check each step. Can you see Carry out your plan. clearly that the step is correct? Can you prove that it is correct? CARRYING OUT THE PLAN Examine the solution obtained. Fourth. Can you check the result? Can you check the argument? Can you derive the result differently? Can you see it at a glance? Can you use the result, or the method, for some other problem? LOOKING BACK ~ ~ 0 ~ <:! "' ~ ~: This page intentionally left blank Foreword by John H. Conway How to Solve It is a wonderful book! This I realized when I first read right through it as a student many years ago, but it has taken me a long time to appreciate just how wonder ful it is. Why is that? One part of the answer is that the book is unique. In all my years as a student and teacher, I have never seen another that lives up to George Polya's title by teaching you how to go about solving problems. A. H. Schoenfeld correctly described its importance in his 1987 article "Polya, Problem Solving, and Education" in Mathematics Magazine: "For mathematics education and the world of problem solving it marked a line of demarcation between two eras, problem solving before and after Polya." It is one of the most successful mathematics books ever written, having sold over a million copies and been translated into seventeen languages since it first appeared in 1945. Polya later wrote two more books about the art of doing mathematics, Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning ( 1954) and Mathematical Discovery (two volumes, 1962 and 1965). The book's title makes it seem that it is directed only toward students, but in fact it is addressed just as much to their teachers. Indeed, as Polya remarks in his introduction, the first part of the book takes the teacher's viewpoint more often than the student's. Everybody gains that way. The student who reads the book on his own will find that overhearing Polya's comments to his non-existent teacher can bring that desirable person into being, as an imaginary but very helpful figure leaning over one's shoulder. This is what happened to me, and naturally I made heavy use of the remarks I'd found most important when I myself started teaching a few years later. xix XX Foreword But it was some time before I read the book again, and when I did, I suddenly realized that it was even more valuable than I'd thought! Many of Polya's remarks that hadn't helped me as a student now made me a better teacher of those whose problems had differed from mine. Polya had met many more students than I had, and had obviously thought very hard about how to best help all of them learn mathematics. Perhaps his most important point is that learn ing must be active. As he said in a lecture on teaching, "Mathematics, you see, is not a spectator sport. To under stand mathematics means to be able to do mathematics. And what does it mean [to be] doing mathematics? In the first place, it means to be able to solve mathematical problems." It is often said that to teach any subject well, one has to understand it "at least as well as one's students do." It is a paradoxical truth that to teach mathematics well, one must also know how to misunderstand it at least to the extent one's students do! If a teacher's statement can be parsed in two or more ways, it goes without saying that some students will understand it one way and others another, with results that can vary from the hilarious to the tragic. ]. E. Little wood gives two amusing examples of assumptions that can easily be made unconsciously and misleadingly. First, he remarks that the description of the coordinate axes ("Ox and Oy as in 2 dimensions, Ozvertical") in Lamb's book Me chanics is incorrect for him, since he always worked in an armchair with his feet up! Then, after asking how his reader would present the picture of a closed curve lying all on one side of its tangent, he states that there are four main schools (to left or right of vertical tangent, or above or below hori zontal one) and that by lecturing without a figure, presum ing that the curve was to the right of its vertical tangent, h e h ad unwittingly made nonsense for the other three schools. I know of no better remedy for such presumptions than Polya's counsel: before trying to solve a problem, the stu- FiJreword XXI dent should demonstrate his or her understanding of its statement, preferably to a real teacher, but in lieu of that, to an imagined one. Experienced mathematicians know that often the hardest part of researching a problem is under standing precisely what that problem says. They often fol low Polya's wise advice: "If you can't solve a problem, then there is an easier problem you can't solve: find it." Readers who learn from this book will also want to learn about its author's life. 1 George Polya was born Gyorgy Polya (he dropped the accents sometime later) on December 13, 1887, in Buda pest, Hungary, to Jakab Polya and his wife, the former Anna Deutsch. He was baptized into the Roman Catholic faith, to which Jakab, Anna, and their three previous children,Jen6, Ilona, and Flora, had converted fromJudaism in the previ ous year. Their fifth child, Laszlo, was born four years later. Jakab had changed his surname from Pollak to the more Hungarian-sounding Polya five years before Gyorgy was born, believing that this might help him obtain a university post, which he eventually did, but only shortly before his untimely death in 1897. At the Daniel Berzsenyi Gymnasium, Gyorgy studied Greek, Latin, and German, in addition to Hungarian. It is surprising to learn that there he was seemingly uninterested in mathematics, his work in geometry deemed merely "sat isfactory" compared with his "outstanding" performance in literature, geography, and other subjects. His favorite sub ject, outside of literature, was biology. H e enrolled at the University of Budapest in 1905, ini tially studying law, which he soon dropped because he found it too boring. He then obtained the certification needed to teach Latin and Hungarian at a gymnasium, a 1The following biographical information is taken from that given by ]. ]. O 'Connor and E. F. Robertson in the MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive (www-gap.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/ -histor y/ ). xxii Foreword certification that he never used but of which he remained proud. Eventually his professor, Bernat Alexander, advised him that to help his studies in philosophy, he should take some mathematics and physics courses. This was how he came to mathematics. Later, he joked that he "wasn't good enough for physics, and was too good for philosophy mathematics is in between." In Budapest he was taught physics by Eotvos and mathe matics by Fejer and was awarded a doctorate after spending the academic year 1910-11 in Vienna, where he took some courses by Wirtinger and Mertens. He spent much of the next two years in Gottingen, where he met many more mathematicians-Klein, Caratheodory, Hilbert, Runge, Landau, Weyl, Heeke, Courant, and Toeplitz-and in 1914 visited Paris, where he became acquainted with Picard and Hadamard and learned that Hurwitz had arranged an appointment for him in Zurich. He accepted this position, writing later: "I went to Zurich in order to be near Hurwitz, and we were in close touch for about six years, from my arrival in Zurich in 1914 to his passing [in 1919]. I was very much impressed by him and edited his works." Of course, the First World War took place during this period. It initially had little effect on Polya, who had been declared unfit for service in the Hungarian army as the result of a soccer wound. But later when the army, more desperately needing recruits, demanded that he return to fight for his country, his strong pacifist views led him to refuse. As a consequence, he was unable to visit Hungary for many years, and in fact did not do so until 1967, fifty four years after he left. In the meantime, he had taken Swiss citizenship and married a Swiss girl, Stella Vera Weber, in 1918. Between 1918 and 1919, he published papers on a wide range of mathematical subjects, such as series, number theory, com binatorics, voting systems, astronomy, and probability. He Foreword xxiii was made an extraordinary professor at the Zurich ETH in 1920, and a few years later he and Gabor Szeg6 published their book Aufgaben und Lehrsatze aus der Analysis ("Problems and Theorems in Analysis"), described by G. L. Alexander son and L. H. Lange in their obituary of Polya as "a math ematical masterpiece that assured their reputations." That book appeared in 1925, after Polya had obtained a Rockefeller Fellowship to work in England, where he col laborated with Hardy and Littlewood on what later became their book Inequalities (Cambridge University Press, 1936). He used a second Rockefeller Fellowship to visit Princeton University in 1933, and while in the United States was invited by H. F. Blichfeldt to visit Stanford University, which he greatly enjoyed, and which ultimately became his home. Polya held a professorship at Stanford from 1943 until his re tirement in 1953, and it was there, in 1978, that he taught his last course, in combinatorics; he died on September 7, 198 5, at the age of ninety-seven. Some readers will want to know about Polya's many con tributions to mathematics. Most of them relate to analysis and are too technical to be understood by non-experts, but a few are worth mentioning. In probability theory, Polya is responsible for the now standard term "Central Limit Theorem" and for proving that the Fourier transform of a probability measure is a characteristic function and that a random walk on the inte ger lattice closes with probability 1 if and only if the dimen sion is at most 2. In geometry, Polya independently re-enumerated the seventeen plane crystallographic groups (their first enumer ation, by E. S. Fedorov, having been forgotten) and together with P. Niggli devised a notation for them. In combinatorics, Polya's Enumeration Theorem is now a standard way of counting configurations according to their symmetry. It has been described by R. C. Read as "a xxiv Foreword remarkable theorem in a remarkable paper, and a land mark in the history of combinatorial analysis." How to Solve !twas written in German during Polya's time in Zurich, which ended in 1940, when the European situa tion forced him to leave for the United States. Despite the book's eventual success, four publishers rejected the English version before Princeton University Press brought it out in 1945· In their hands, How to Solve It rapidly became-and continues to be-one of the most successful mathematical books of all time. Introduction The following considerations are grouped around the preceding list of questions and suggestions entitled "How to Solve It." Any question or suggestion quoted from it will be printed in italics, and the whole list will be referred to simply as "the list" or as "our list." The following pages will discuss the purpose of the list, illustrate its practical use by examples, and explain the underlying notions and mental operations. By way of
