# Auto Chapter 3

When, eventually, with more or less help, the students succeed in introducing the decisive auxiliary element, the right triangle emphasized in Fig. 1, the teacher should convince himself that the students see sufficiently far ahead before encouraging them to go into actual calcula tions. "I think that it was a good idea to draw that triangle. You have now a triangle; but have you the unknown?" "The unknown is the hypotenuse of the triangle; we can calculate it by the theorem of Pythagoras." "You can, if both legs are known; but are they?" "One leg is given, it is c. And the other, I think, is not difficult to find. Yes, the other leg is the hypotenuse of another right triangle." "Very good! Now I see that you have a plan." ll. Carrying out the plan. To devise a plan, to con ceive the idea of the solution is not easy. It takes so much to succeed; formerly acquired knowledge, good mental habits, concentration upon the purpose, and one more thing: good luck. To carry out the plan is much easier; what we need is mainly patience. The plan gives a general outline; we have to convince I2. Example ourselves that the details fit into the outline, and so we have to examine the details one after the other, patiently, till everything is perfectly clear, and no obscure corner remains in which an error could be hidden. If the student has really conceived a plan, the teacher has now a relatively peaceful time. The main danger is that the student forgets his plan. This may easily happen if the student received his plan from outside, and ac cepted it on the authority of the teacher; but if he worked for it himself, even with some help, and conceived the final idea with satisfaction, he will not lose this idea easily. Yet the teacher must insist that the student should check each step. We may convince ourselves of the correctness of a step in our reasoning either "intuitively" or "formally." We may concentrate upon the point in question till we see it so clearly and distinctly that we have no doubt that the step is correct; or we may derive the point in ques tion according to formal rules. (The difference between "insight" and "formal proof" is clear enough in many important cases; we may leave further discussion to philosophers.) The main point is that the student should be honestly convinced of the correctness of each step. In certain cases, the teacher may emphasize the difference between "see ing" and "proving": Can you see clearly that the step is correct? But can you also prove that the step is correct? 12. Example. Let us resume our work at the point where we left it at the end of section 10. The student, at last, has got the idea of the solution. He sees the right triangle of which the unknown x is the hypotenuse and the given height c is one of the legs; the other leg is the diagonal of a face. The student must, possibly, be urged to introduce suitable notation. He should choosey to de note that other leg, the diagonal of the face whose sides In the Classroom are a and b. Thus, he may see more clearly the idea of the solution which is to introduce an auxiliary problem whose unknown is y. Finally, working at one right tri angle after the other, he may obtain (see Fig. 1) x2 = y2 + c2 y2 = aZ + b2 and hence, eliminating the auxiliary unknown y, x2 = a2 + bz + c2 x = V a2 + b2 + c2 • The teacher has no reason to interrupt the student if he carries out these details correctly except, possibly, to warn him that he should check each step. Thus, the teacher rna y ask: "Can you see clearly that the triangle with sides x, y, c is a right triangle?" To this question the student may answer honestly "Yes" but he could be much embarrassed if the teacher, not satisfied with the intuitive conviction of the student, should go on asking: "But can you prove that this triangle is a right tri angle?" Thus, the teacher should rather suppress this question unless the class has had a good initiation in solid geome try. Even in the latter case, there is some danger that the answer to an incidental question may become the main difficulty for the majority of the students. 13. Looking back. Even fairly good students, when they have obtained the solution of the problem and writ ten down neatly the argument, shut their books and look for something else. Doing so, they miss an important and instructive phase of the work. By looking back at the completed solution, by reconsidering and reexamining the result and the path that led to it, they could consoli- IJ. Looking Back date their knowledge and develop their ability to solve problems. A good teacher should understand and impress on his students the view that no problem whatever is com pletely exhausted. There remains always something to do; with sufficient study and penetration, we could improve any solution, and, in any case, we can always improve our understanding of the solution. The student has now carried through his plan. He has written down the solution, checking each step. Thus, he should have good reasons to believe that his solution is correct. Nevertheless, errors are always possible, especially if the argument is long and involved. Hence, verifications are desirable. Especially, if there is some rapid and in tuitive procedure to test either the result or the argument, it should not be overlooked. Can you check the result? Can you check the argument? In order to convince ourselves of the presence or of the quality of an object, we like to see and to touch it. And as we prefer perception through two different senses, so we prefer conviction by two different proofs: Can you de rive the result differently? We prefer, of course, a short and intuitive argument to a long and heavy one: Can you see it at a glance? One of the first and foremost duties of the teacher is not to give his students the impression that mathematical problems have little connection with each other, and no connection at all with anything else. We have a natural opportunity to investigate the connections of a problem when looking back at its solution. The students will find looking back at the solution really interesting if they have made an honest effort, and have the consciousness of having done well. Then they are eager to see what else they could accomplish with that effort, and how they could do equally well another time. The teacher should encourage the students to imagine cases in which they 16 In the Classroom could utilize again the procedure used, or apply the re sult obtained. Can you use the result, or the method, for some other problem? 14. Example. In section 12, the students finally ob tained the solution: If the three edges of a rectangular parallelogram, issued from the same corner, are a, b, c, the diagonal is Va2 + b2 + c2• Can you check the result? The teacher cannot expect a good answer to this question from inexperienced stu dents. The students, however, should acquire fairly early the experience that problems "in letters" have a great advantage over purely numerical problems; if the prob lem is given "in letters" its result is accessible to several tests to which a problem "in numbers" is not susceptible at all. Our example, although fairly simple, is sufficient to show this. The teacher can ask several questions about the result which the students may readily answer with "Yes"; but an answer "No" would show a serious flaw in the result. "Did you use all the data? Do all the data a, b, c appear in your formula for the diagonal?" "Length, width, and height play the same role in our question; our problem is symmetric with respect to a, b, c. Is the expression you obtained for the diagonal sym metric in a, b, c? Does it remain unchanged when a, b, c are interchanged?" "Our problem is a problem of solid geometry: to find the diagonal of a parallelepiped with given dimensions a, b, c. Our problem is analogous to a problem of plane geometry: to find the diagonal of a rectangle with given dimensions a, b. Is the result of our 'solid' problem anal ogous to the result of the 'plane' problem?" "If the height c decreases, and finally vanishes, the I4. Example parallelepiped becomes a parallelogram. If you put c = o in your formula, do you obtain the correct formula for the diagonal of the rectangular parallelogram?" "If the height c increases, the diagonal increases. Does your formula show this?" "If all three measures a, b, c of the parallelepiped in crease in the same proportion, the diagonal also increases in the same proportion. If, in your formula, you substi tute 12a, 12b, 12c for a, b, c respectively, the expression of the diagonal, owing to this substitution, should also be multiplied by 12. Is that so?" "If a, b, c are measured in feet, your formula gives the diagonal measured in feet too; but if you change all meas ures into inches, the formula should remain correct. Is that so?" (The two last questions are essentially equivalent; see TEST BY DIMENSION.) These questions have several good effects. First, an in telligent student cannot help being impressed by the fact that the formula passes so many tests. He was convinced before that the formula is correct because he derived it carefully. But now he is more convinced, and his gain in confidence comes from a different source; it is due to a sort of "experimental evidence." Then, thanks to the foregoing questions, the details of the formula acquire new significance, and are linked up with various facts. The formula has therefore a better chance of being re membered, the knowledge of the student is consolidated. Finally, these questions can be easily transferred to simi lar problems. After some experience with similar prob lems, an intelligent student may perceive the underlying general ideas: use of all relevant data, variation of the data, symmetry, analogy. If he gets into the habit of directing his attention to such points, his ability to solve problems may definitely profit. In the Classroom Can you check the argument? To recheck the argument step by step may be necessary in difficult and important cases. Usually, it is enough to pick out "touchy" points for rechecking. In our case, it may be advisable to discuss retrospectively the question which was less advisable to discuss as the solution was not yet attained: Can you prove that the triangle with sides x, y, c is a right tri angle? (See the end of section 12.) Can you use the result or the method for some other problem? With a little encouragement, and after one or two examples, the students easily find applications which consist essentially in giving some concrete interpretation to the abstract mathematical elements of the problem. The teacher himself used such a concrete interpretation as he took the room in which the discussion takes place for the parallelepiped of the problem. A dull student may propose, as application, to calculate the diagonal of the cafeteria instead of the diagonal of the classroom. If the students do not volunteer more imaginative remarks, the teacher himself may put a slightly different problem, for instance: "Being given the length, the width, and the height of a rectangular parallelepiped, find the distance of the center from one of the corners." The students may use the result of the problem they just solved, observing that the distance required is one half of the diagonal they just calculated. Or they may use the method, introducing suitable right triangles (the latter alternative is less obvious and somewhat more clumsy in the present case). After this application, the teacher may discuss the con figuration of the four diagonals of the parallelepiped, and the six pyramids of which the six faces are the bases, the center the common vertex, and the semidiagonals the lateral edges. When the geometric imagination of the students is sufficiently enlivened, the teacher should come IJ. Various Approaches back to his question: Can you use the result, or the method, for some other problem? Now there is a better chance that the students may find some more interesting concrete interpretation, for instance, the following: "In the center of the flat rectangular top of a building which is 21 yards long and 16 yards wide, a flagpole is to be erected, 8 yards high. To support the pole, we need four equal cables. The cables should start from the same point, 2 yards under the top of the pole, and end at the four corners of the top of the building. How long is each cable?" The students may use the method of the problem they solved in detail introducing a right triangle in a vertical plane, and another one in a horizontal plane. Or they may use the result, imagining a rectangular parallele piped of which the diagonal, x, is one of the four cables and the edges are b=S c= 6. By straightforward application of the formula, x = 14·5· For more examples, see CAN YOU USE THE RESULT? 15. Various approaches. Let us still retain, for a while, the problem we considered in the foregoing sections 8, 10, 12, 14. The main work, the discovery of the plan, was described in section 10. Let us observe that the teacher could have proceeded differently. Starting from the same point as in section 10, he could have followed a somewhat different line, asking the following questions: "Do you know any related problem?" "Do you know an analogous problem?" "You see, the proposed problem is a problem of solid geometry. Could you think of a simpler analogous prob lem of plane geometry?" "You see, the proposed problem is about a figure in space, it is concerned with the diagonal of a rectangular 20 In the Classroom parallelepiped. What might be an analogous problem about a figure in the plane? It should be concerned with -the diagonal-of-a rectangular-" "Parallelogram." The students, even if they are very slow and indiffer ent, and were not able to guess anything before, are obliged finally to contribute at least a minute part of the idea. Besides, if the students are so slow, the teacher should not take up the present problem about the paral lelepiped without having discussed before, in order to prepare the students, the analogous problem about the parallelogram. Then, he can go on now as follows: "Here is a problem related to yours and solved before. Can you use it?" "Should you introduce some auxiliary element in order to make its use possible?" Eventually, the teacher may succeed in suggesting to the students the desirable idea. It consists in conceiving the diagonal of the given parallelepiped as the diagonal of a suitable parallelogram which must be introduced into the figure (as intersection of the parallelepiped with a plane passing through two opposite edges). The idea is essentially the same as before (section 10) but the ap proach is different. In section 10, the contact with the available knowledge of the students was established through the unknown; a formerly solved problem was recollected because its unknown was the same as that of the proposed problem. In the present section analogy provides the contact with the idea of the solution. 16. The teacher's method of questioning shown in the foregoing sections 8, 10, 12, 14, 15 is essentially this: Begin with a general question or suggestion of our list, and, if necessary, come down gradually to more specific and concrete questions or suggestions till you reach one which elicits a response in the student's mind. If you 16. The Teacher's Method of Questioning 21 have to help the student exploit his idea, start again, if possible, from a general question or suggestion contained in the list, and return again to some more special one if necessary; and so on. Of course, our list is just a first list of this kind; it seems to be sufficient for the majority of simple cases, but there is no doubt that it could be perfected. It is impor tant, however, that the suggestions from which we start should be simple, natural, and general, and that their list should be short. The suggestions must be simple and natural because otherwise they cannot be unobtrusive. The suggestions must be general, applicable not only to the present problem but to problems of all sorts, if they are to help develop the ability of the student and not just a special technique. The list must be short in order that the questions may be often repeated, unartificially, and under varying cir cumstances; thus, there is a chance that they will be eventually assimilated by the student and will contribute to the development of a mental habit. It is necessary to come down gradually to specific sug gestions, in order that the student may have as great a share of the work as possible. This method of questioning is not a rigid one; for tunately so, because, in these matters, any rigid, mechani cal, pedantical procedure is necessarily bad. Our method admits a certain elasticity and variation, it admits various approaches (section 15) , it can be and should be so applied that questions asked by the teacher could have occurred to the student himself. If a reader wishes to try the method here proposed in his class he should, of course, proceed with caution. He should study carefully the example introduced in section 8, and the following examples in sections 18, 19, 20. He 22 In the Classroom should prepare carefully the examples which he intends to discuss, considering also various approaches. He should start with a few trials and find out gradually how he can manage the method, how the students take it, and how much time it takes. 17. Good questions and bad questions. If the method of questioning formulated in the foregoing section is well understood it helps to judge, by comparison, the quality of certain suggestions which may be offered with the in tention of helping the students. Let us go back to the situation as it presented itself at the beginning of section 10 when the question was asked: Do you know a related problem? Instead of this, with the best intention to help the students, the question may be offered: Could you apply the theorem of Pythagoras? The intention may be the best, but the question is about the worst. We must realize in what situation it was of fered; then we shall see that there is a long sequence of objections against that sort of "help." (1) If the student is near to the solution, he may un derstand the suggestion implied by the question; but if he is not, he quite possibly will not see at all the point at which the question is driving. Thus the question fails to help where help is most needed. (2) If the suggestion is understood, it gives the whole secret away, very little remains for the student to do. (3) The suggestion is of too special a nature. Even if the student can make use of it in solving the present problem, nothing is learned for future problems. The question is not instructive. (4) Even if he understands the suggestion, the student can scarcely understand how the teacher came to the idea of putting such a question. And how could he, the stu dent, find such a question by himself? It appears as an unnatural surprise, as a rabbit pulled out of a hat; it is really not instructive. I8. A Problem of Construction None of these objections can be raised against the pro cedure described in section 10, or against that in sec tion 15. MORE EXAMPLES 18. A problem of construction. Inscribe a square in a given triangle. Two vertices of the square should be on the base of the triangle, the two other vertices of the square on the two other sides of the triangle, one on each. "What is the unknown?" "A square." "What are the data?" "A triangle is given, nothing else." "What is the condition?" "The four corners of the square should be on the per imeter of the triangle, two corners on the base, one cor ner on each of the other two sides." "Is it possible to satisfy the condition?" "I think so. I am not so sure." "You do not seem to find the problem too easy. If you cannot solve the proposed problem, try to solve first some related problem. Could you satisfy a part of the con dition?" "What do you mean by a part of the condition?" "You see, the condition is concerned with all the ver tices of the square. How many vertices are there?" "Four." "A part of the condition would be concerned with less than four vertices. Keep only a part of the condition, drop the other part. What part of the condition is easy to satisfy?" "It is easy to draw a square with two vertices on the perimeter of the triangle-or even one with three vertices on the perimeter!" "Draw a figure!" 24 In the Classroom The student draws Fig. 2. "You kept only a part of the condition, and you dropped the other part. How far is the unknown now determined?" FIG. 2 "The square is not determined if it has only three vertices on the perimeter of the triangle." "Good! Draw a figure." The student draws Fig. 3· FIG. 3 "The square, as you said, is not determined by the part of the condition you kept. How can it vary?" "Three corners of your square are on the perimeter of the triangle but the fourth corner is not yet there where it should be. Your square, as you said, is undetermined, I9. A Problem to Prove it can vary; the same is true of its fourth corner. How can it vary?" "Try it experimentally, if you wish. Draw more squares with three comers on the perimeter in the same way as the two squares already in the figure. Draw small squares and large squares. What seems to be the locus of the fourth corner? How can it vary?" The teacher brought the student very near to the idea of the solution. If the student is able to guess that the locus of the fourth corner is a straight line, he has got it. 19. A problem to prove. Two angles are in different planes but each side of one is parallel to the correspond ing side of the other, and has also the same direction. Prove that such angles are equal. What we have to prove is a fundamental theorem of solid geometry. The problem may be proposed to stu dents who are familiar with plane geometry and ac quainted with those few facts of solid geometry which prepare the present theorem in Euclid's Elements. (The theorem that we have stated and are going to prove is the proposition 10 of Book XI of Euclid.) Not only ques tions and suggestions quoted from our list are printed in italics but also others which correspond to them as "problems to prove" correspond to "problems to find." (The correspondence is worked out systematically m PROBLEMS TO FIND, PROBLEMS TO PROVE 5• 6.) "What is the hypothesis?" "Two angles are in different planes. Each side of one is parallel to the corresponding side of the other, and has also the same direction. "What is the conclusion?" "The angles are equal." "Draw a figure. Introduce
