# Auto Chapter 4

suitable notation." In the Classroom The student draws the lines of Fig. 4 and chooses, helped more or less by the teacher, the letters as in Fig. 4· "What is the hypothesis? Say it, please, using your nota tion." "A , B, C are not in the same plane as A', B', C'. And AB II A'B') AC II A'C'. Also AB has the same direction as A'B', and AC the same as A'C'." FIG. 4 "What is the conclusion?" "LBAC = LB' A'C'." "Look at the conclusion! And try to think of a familiar theorem having the same or a similar conclusion." "If two triangles are congruent, the corresponding angles are equal." "Very good! Now here is a theorem related to yours and proved before. Could you use it?" "I think so but I do not see yet quite how." "Shouldyou introduce some auxiliary element in order to make its use possible?" "Well, the theorem which you quoted so well is about zg. A Problem to Prove triangles, about a pair of congruent triangles. Have you any triangles in your figure?" "No. But I could introduce some. Let me join B to C) and B' to C'. Then there are two triangles, 6, ABC) 6. A'B'C'." "Well done. But what are these triangles good for?" "To prove the conclusion, LBAC = LB'A'C'." "Good! If you wish to prove this, what kind of tri- angles do you need?" c• B' A' c A B FIG. 5 "Congruent triangles. Yes, of course, I may choose B) C) B') C' so that AB = A' B') A C = A'C'." "Very good! Now, what do you wish to prove?" "I wish to prove that the triangles are congruent, 6. ABC= 6. A'B'C'. If I could prove this, the conclusion LBAC = LB'A'C' would follow immediately." "Fine! You have a new aim, you aim at a new conclu· sion. Look at the conclusion! And try to think of a In the Classroom familiar theorem having the same or a similar conclu sion." "Two triangles are congruent if-if the three sides of the one are equal respectively to the three sides of the other." "Well done. You could have chosen a worse one. Now here is a theorem related to yours and proved before. Could you use it?" "I could use it if I knew that BC = B'C'." "That is right! Thus, what is your aim?" "To prove that BC = B'C'." "Try to think of a familiar theorem having the same or a similar conclusion." "Yes, I know a theorem finishing: ' ... then the two lines are equal.' But it does not fit in." "Should you introduce some auxiliary element in order to make its use possible?" "You see, how could you prove BC = B'C' when there is no connection in the figure between BC and B'C'?" "Did you use the hypothesis? What is the hypothesis?" "We suppose that AB II A'B', AC II A'C'. Yes, of course, I must use that." "Did you use the whole hypothesis? You say that AB II A'B'. Is that all that you know about these lines?" "No; AB is also equal to A'B', by construction. They are parallel and equal to each other. And so are AC and A'C'." "Two parallel lines of equal length-it is an interesting configuration. Have you seen it before?" "Of course! Yes! Parallelogram! Let me join A to A', B to B', and C to C'." "The idea is not so bad. How many parallelograms have you now in your figure?" "Two. No, three. No, two. I mean, there are two of 20. A Rate Problem 29 which you can prove immediately that they are paral lelograms. There is a third which seems to be a parallelo gram; I hope I can prove that it is one. And then the proof will be finished!" We could have gathered from his foregoing answers that the student is intelligent. But after this last remark of his, there is no doubt. This student is able to guess a mathematical result and to distinguish clearly between proof and guess. He knows also that guesses can be more or less plausible. Really, he did profit something from his mathematics classes; he has some real experience in solving problems, he can conceive and exploit a good idea. 20. A rate problem. Water is flowing into a conical vessel at the rate r. The vessel has the shape of a right circular cone, with horizontal base, the vertex pointing downwards; the radius of the base is a, the altitude of the FIG. 6 cone b. Find the rate at which the surface is rising when the depth of the water is y. Finally, obtain the numerical value of the unknown supposing that a = 4 ft., b = 3 ft., r = 2 cu. ft . per minute, and y = 1 ft. The students are supposed to know the simplest rules of differentiation and the notion of "rate of change." "What are the data?" In the Classroom "The radius of the base of the cone a - 4 ft., the alti tude of the cone b - 3 ft., the rate at which the water is flowing into the vessel r == 2 cu. ft. per minute, and the depth of the water at a certain moment, y = 1 ft." "Correct. The statement of the problem seems to sug gest that you should disregard, provisionally, the numeri cal values, work with the letters, express the unknown in terms of a, b, r, y and only finally, after having obtained the expression of the unknown in letters, substitute the numerical values. I would follow this suggestion. Now, what is the unknown?" "The rate at which the surface is rising when the depth of the water is y." "What is that? Could you say it in other terms?" "The rate at which the depth of the water is in- creasing." "What is that? Could you restate it still differently?" "The rate of change of the depth of the water." "That is right, the rate of change of y. But what is the rate of change? Go back to the definition." "The derivative is the rate of change of a function." "Correct. Now, is y a function? As we said before, we disregard the numerical value of y. Can you imagine that y changes?" "Yes, y, the depth of the water, increases as the time goes by." "Thus, y is a function of what?" "Of the time t." "Good. Introduce suitable notation. How would you write the 'rate of change of y' in mathematical symbols?" "dy " dt "Good. Thus, this is your unknown. You have to ex press it in terms of a, b, r, y. By the way, one of these data is a 'rate.' Which one?" 20. A Rate Problem "r is the rate at which water is flowing into the vessel." "What is that? Could you say it in other terms?" "r is the rate of change of the volume of the water in the vessel." "What is that? Could you restate it still differently? How would you write it in suitable notation?" " dV , r = dt' "What is V?" "The volume of the water in the vessel at the time t." "Good. Thus, you have to express 1e in terms of a, b, dV H dt ,y. ow Wl you o It "II d . ?" "If you cannot solve the proposed problem try to solve first some related problem. If you do not see yet the con- nection between 1e and the data, try to bring in some simpler connection that could serve as a stepping stone." "Do you not see that there are other connections? For instance, are y and V independent of each other?" "No. When y increases, V must increase too." "Thus, there is a connection. What is the connection?" "Well, Vis the volume of a cone of which the altitude is y. But I do not know yet the radius of the base." "You may consider it, nevertheless. Call it something, say x." "V = 1rX y ." 2 3 "Correct. Now, what about x? Is it independent of y?" "No. When the depth of the water, y, increases the radius of the free surface, x, increases too." "Thus, there is a connection. What is the connection?" In the Classroom "Of course, similar triangles. x:y=a:b." "One more connection, you see. I would not miss profiting from it. Do not forget, you wished to know the connection between V and y." "I have X= ay b 2 3 V = 'Ira y ·" sbz "Very good. This looks like a stepping stone, does it not? But you should not forget your goal. What is the unknown?" ' dt "Well dy ·" "You have to find a connection between 1e , ~, and other quantities. And here you have one between Y~ VJ and other quantities. What to do?" "Differentiate! Of course! dV 1ra2y 2 dy Tt= IT dt. Here it is." "Fine! And what about the numerical values?" "If a = 4 b = 3 - = r = 2 y = 1 then ' ' ' dV ' dt 1r X r6 X r dy , dt' 9 2= PART II. HOW TO SOLVE IT A DIALOGUE Getting Acquainted Where should I start? Start from the statement of the problem. What can I do? Visualize the problem as a whole as clearly and as vividly as you can. Do not concern your self with details for the moment. What can I gain by doing so? You should understand the problem, familiarize yourself with it, impress its pur pose on your mind. The attention bestowed on the prob lem may also stimulate your memory and prepare for the recollection of relevant points. Working for Better Understanding Where should I start? Start again from the statement of the problem. Start when this statement is so clear to you and so well impressed on your mind that you may lose sight of it for a while without fear of losing it alto gether. What can I do? Isolate the principal parts of your problem. The hypothesis and the conclusion are the principal parts of a "problem to prove"; the unknown, the data, and the conditions are the principal parts of a "problem to find." Go through the principal parts of your problem, consider them one by one, consider them in turn, consider them in various combinations, relating each detail to other details and each to the whole of the problem. 33 34 A Dialogue What can I gain by doing so? You should prepare and clarify details which are likely to play a role afterwards. Hunting for the Helpful Idea Where should I start? Start from the consideration of the principal parts of your problem. Start when these principal parts are distinctly arranged and clearly con ceived, thanks to your previous work, and when your memory seems responsive. What can I do? Consider your problem from various sides and seek contacts with your formerly acquired knowledge. Consider your problem from various sides. Emphasize different parts, examine different details, examine the same details repeatedly but in different ways, combine the details differently, approach them from different sides. Try to see some new meaning in each detail, some new interpretation of the whole. Seek contacts with your formerly acquired knowledge. Try to think of what helped you in similar situations in the past. Try to recognize something familiar in what you examine, try to perceive something useful in what you recognize. What could I perceive? A helpful idea, perhaps a de cisive idea that shows you at a glance the way to the very end. How can an idea be helpful? It shows you the whole of the way or a part of the way; it suggests to you more or less distinctly how you can proceed. Ideas are more or less complete. You are lucky if you have any idea at alL What can I do with an incomplete idea? You should consider it. If it looks advantageous you should consider it longer. If it looks reliable you should ascertain how A Dialogue 35 far it leads you, and reconsider the situation. The situa tion has changed, thanks to your helpful idea. Consider the new situation from various sides and seek contacts with your formerly acquired knowledge. What can I gain by doing so again? You may be lucky and have another idea. Perhaps your next idea will lead you to the solution right away. Perhaps you need a few more helpful ideas after the next. Perhaps you will be led astray by some of your ideas. Nevertheless you should be grateful for all new ideas, also for the lesser ones, also for the hazy ones, also for the supplementary ideas add ing some precision to a hazy one, or attempting the cor rection of a less fortunate one. Even if you do not have any appreciable new ideas for a while you should be grateful if your conception of the problem becomes more complete or more coherent, more homogeneous or better balanced. Carrying Out the Plan Where should I start? Start from the lucky idea that led you to the solution. Start when you feel sure of your grasp of the main connection and you feel confident that you can supply the minor details that may be wanting. What can I do? Make your grasp quite secure. Carry through in detail all the algebraic or geometric opera tions which you have recognized previously as feasible. Convince yourself of the correctness of each step by for mal reasoning, or by intuitive insight, or both ways if you can. If your problem is very complex you may distin guish "great" steps and "small" steps, each great step being composed of several small ones. Check first the great steps, and get down to the smaller ones afterwards. What can I gain by doing so? A presentation of the solution each step of which is correct beyond doubt. A Dialogue Looking Back Where should I start? From the solution, complete and correct in each detail. What can I do? Consider the solution from various sides and seek contacts with your formerly acquired knowledge. Consider the details of the solution and try to make them as simple as you can; survey more extensive parts of the solution and try to make them shorter; try to see the whole solution at a glance. Try to modify to their advantage smaller or larger parts of the solution, try to improve the whole solution, to make it intuitive, to fit it into your formerly acquired knowledge as naturally as possible. Scrutinize the method that led you to the solution, try to see its point, and try to make use of it for other problems. Scrutinize the result and try to make use of it for other problems. What can I gain by doing so? You may find a new and better solution, you may discover new and interesting facts. In any case, if you get into the habit of surveying and scrutinizing your solutions in this way, you will acquire some knowledge well ordered and ready to use, and you will develop your ability of solving problems. PART III. SHORT DICTIONARY OF HEURISTIC Analogy is a sort of similarity. Similar objects agree with each other in some respect, analogous objects agree in certain relations of their respective parts. 1. A rectangular parallelogram is analogous to a rec tangular parallelepiped. In fact, the relations between the sides of the parallelogram are similar to those be tween the faces of the parallelepiped: Each side of the parallelogram is parallel to just one other side, and is perpendicular to the remaining sides. Each face of the parallelepiped is parallel to just one other face, and is perpendicular to the remaining faces. Let us agree to call a side a "bounding element" of the parallelogram and a face a "bounding element" of the parallelepiped. Then, we may contract the two fore going statements into one that applies equally to both figures: Each bounding element is parallel to just one other bounding element and is perpendicular to the remaining bounding elements. Thus, we have expressed certain relations which are common to the two systems of objects we compared, sides of the rectangle and faces of the rectangular parallele piped. The analogy of these systems consists in this com munity of relations. 2. Analogy pervades all our thinking, our everyday speech and our trivial conclusions as well as artistic ways of expression and the highest scientific achieve ments. Analogy is used on very different levels. People 37 Analogy often use vague, ambiguous, incomplete, or incompletely clarified analogies, but analogy may reach the level of mathematical precision. All sorts of analogy may play a role in the discovery of the solution and so we should not neglect any sort. 3· "\1\Te may consider ourselves lucky when, trying to solve a problem, we succeed in discovering a simpler analogous problem. In section 15, our original problem was concerned with the diagonal of a rectangular paral lelepiped; the consideration of a simpler analogous prob lem, concerned with the diagonal of a rectangle, led us to the solution of the original problem. We are going to discuss one more case of the same sort. We have to solve the following problem: Find the center of gravity of a homogeneous tetra hedron. Without knowledge of the integral calculus, and with little knowledge of physics, this problem is not easy at all; it was a serious scientific problem in the days of Archimedes or Galileo. Thus, if we wish to solve it with as little preliminary knowledge as possible, we should look around for a simpler analogous problem. The corre sponding problem in the plane occurs here naturally: Find the center of gravity of a homogeneous triangle. Now. we have two questions instead of one. But two questions may be easier to answer than just one question -provided that the two questions are intelligently con nected. 4· Laying aside, for the moment, our original problem concerning the tetrahedron, we concentrate upon the simpler analogous problem concerning the triangle. To solve this problem, we have to know something about centers of gravity. The following principle is plausible and presents itself naturally. If a system of masses S consists of parts, each of which Analogy 39 has its center of gravity in the same plane) then this plane contains also the center of gravity of the whole system S. This principle yields all that we need in the case of the triangle. First, it implies that the center of gravity of the triangle lies in the plane of the triangle. Then, we may consider the triangle as consisting of fibers (thin strips, "infinitely narrow'' parallelograms) parallel to a certain side of the triangle (the side AB in Fig. 7). The center of gravity of each fiber (of any parallelogram) is, obvi ously, its midpoint, and all these midpoints lie on the line joining the vertex C opposite to the side AB to the midpoint M of AB (see Fig. 7). c A M FIG. 7 B Any plane passing through the median CM of the tri angle contains the centers of gravity of all parallel fibers which constitute the triangle. Thus, we are led to the conclusion that the center of gravity of the whole tri angle lies on the same median. Yet it must lie on the other two medians just as well, it must be the common point of intersection of all three medians. It is desirable to verify now by pure geometry, inde pendently of any mechanical assumption, that the three medians meet in the same point. Analogy 5· After the case of the triangle, the case of the tetra hedron is fairly easy. We have now solved a problem analogous to our proposed problem and, having solved it, we have a model to follow. In solving the analogous problem which we use now as a model, we conceived the triangle ABC as consisting of fibers parallel to one of its sides, AB. Now, we conceive the tetrahedron ABCD as consisting of fibers parallel to one of its edges, AB. The midpoints of the fibers which constitute the tri angle lie all on the same straight line, a median of the triangle, joining the midpoint M of the side AB to the opposite vertex C. The midpoints of the fibers which con stitute the tetrahedron lie all in the same plane, joining the midpoint M of the edge AB to the opposite edge CD (see Fig. 8); we may call this plane MCD a median plane of the tetrahedron. D A M FIG. 8 B In the case of the triangle, we had three medians like MC, each of which has to contain the center of gravity of the triangle. Therefore, these three medians must meet in one point which is precisely the center of gravity. In Analogy the case of the tetrahedron we have six median planes like MCD, joining the midpoint of some edge to the op posite edge, each of which has to contain the center of gravity of the tetrahedron. Therefore, these six median planes must meet in one point which is precisely the center of gravity. 6. Thus, we have solved the problem of the center of gravity of the homogeneous tetrahedron. To complete our solution, it is desirable to verify now by pure geome try, independently of mechanical considerations, that the six median planes mentioned pass through the same point. When we had solved the problem of the center of grav ity of the homogeneous triangle, we found it desirable to verify, in order to complete our solution, that the three medians of the triangle pass through the same point. This problem is analogous to the foregoing but visibly simpler. Again we may use, in solving the problem concerning the tetrahedron, the simpler analogous problem concern ing the triangle (which we may suppose here as solved) . In fact, consider the three median planes, passing through the three edges DA, DB, DC issued from the vertex D; each passes also through the midpoint of the opposite edge (the median plane through DC passes through M , see Fig. 8). Now, these three median planes intersect the plane of b. ABC in the three medians of this triangle. These three medians pass through the same point (this is the r esult of the simpler analogous prob lem) and this point, just as D, is a common point of the three median planes. The straight line, joining the two common points, is common to all three median planes. We proved that those 3 among the 6 median planes which pass through the vertex D have a common straight line. The same must be true of those 3 median planes 42 Analogy which pass through A; and also of the 3 median planes through B; and also of the 3 through C. Connecting these facts suitably, we may prove that the 6 median planes have a common point. (The 3 median planes passing through the sides of !:, ABC determine a com mon point, and 3 lines of intersection which meet in the common point. Now, by what we have just proved, through each line of intersection one more median plane must pass.) 7. Both under 5 and under 6 we used a simpler analo gous problem, concerning the triangle, to solve a prob lem about the tetrahedron. Yet the two cases are different in an important respect. Under 5, we used the method of the simpler analogous problem whose solution we imi tated point by point. Under 6, we used the result of the simpler analogous problem, and we did not care how this result had been obtained. Sometimes, we may be
