# Auto Chapter 5

able to use both the method and the result of the simpler analogous problem. Even our foregoing example shows this if we regard the considerations under 5 and 6 as different parts of the solution of the same problem. Our example is typical. In solving a proposed problem, we can often use the solution of a simpler analogous problem; we may be able to use its method, or its result, or both. Of course, in more difficult cases, complications may arise which are not yet shown by our example. Especially, it can happen that the solution of the analo gous problem cannot be immediately used for our orig inal problem. Then, it may be worth while to reconsider the solution, to vary and to modify it till, after having tried various forms of the solution, we find eventually one that can be extended to our original problem. 8. It is desirable to foresee the result, or, at least, some features of the result, with some degree of plausibility. Such plausible forecasts are often based on analogy. Analogy 43 Thus, we may know that the center of gravity of a homogeneous triangle coincides with the center of gravity of its three vertices (that is, of three material points with equal masses, placed in the vertices of the triangle) . Knowing this, we may conjecture that the center of gravity of a homogeneous tetrahedron coincides with the center of gravity of its four vertices. This conjecture is an "inference by analogy." Knowing that the triangle and the tetrahedron are alike in many respects, we conjecture that they are alike in one more respect. It would be foolish to regard the plausibility of such conjectures as certainty, but it would be just as foolish, or even more foolish, to disregard such plausible conjectures. Inference by analogy appears to be the most common kind of conclusion, and it is possibly the most essential kind. It yields more or less plausible conjectures which may or may not be confirmed by experience and stricter reasoning. The chemist, experimenting on animals in order to foresee the influence of his drugs on humans, draws conclusions by analogy. But so did a small boy I knew. His pet dog had to be taken to the veterinary, and he inquired: "Who is the veterinary?" "The animal doctor." "Which animal is the animal doctor?" g. An analogical conclusion from many parallel cases is stronger than one from fewer cases. Yet quality is still more important here than quantity. Clear-cut analogies weigh more heavily than vague similarities, systematically arranged instances count for more than random collec tions of cases. In the foregoing (under 8) we put forward a con jec ture about the center of gravity of the tetrahedron. This conjecture was supported by analogy; the case of the 44 Analogy tetrahedron is analogous to that of the triangle. We may strengthen the conjecture by examining one more analo gous case, the case of a homogeneous rod (that is, a straight line-segment of uniform density). The analogy between segment triangle tetrahedron has many aspects. A segment is contained in a straight line, a triangle in a plane, a tetrahedron in space. Straight line-segments are the simplest one-dimensional bounded figures, triangles the simplest polygons, tetrahedrons the simplest polyhedrons. The segment has 2 zero-dimensional bounding ele ments (2 end-points) and its interior is one-dimensional. The triangle has 3 zero-dimensional and 3 one-dimen sional bounding elements (3 vertices, 3 sides) and its interior is two-dimensional. The tetrahedron has 4 zero-dimensional, 6 one-dimen sional, and 4 two-dimensional bounding elements (4 vertices, 6 edges, 4 faces), and its interior is three-dimen sional. These numbers can be assembled into a table. The suc cessive columns contain the numbers for the zero-, one-, two-, and three-dimensional elements, the successive rows the numbers for the segment, triangle, and tetrahedron: 2 1 3 3 1 4 6 4 1 Very little familiarity with the powers of a binomial is needed to recognize in these numbers a section of Pascal's triangle. We found a remarkable regularity in segment, triangle, and tetrahedron. 10. If we have experienced that the objects we com pare are closely connected, "inferences by analogy," as the following, may have a certain weight with us. Analogy 45 The center of gravity of a homogeneous rod coincides with the center of gravity of its 2 end-points. The center of gravity of a homogeneous triangle coincides with the center of gravity of its 3 vertices. Should we not suspect that the center of gravity of a homogeneous tetrahedron coincides with the center of gravity of its 4 vertices? Again, the center of gravity of a homogeneous rod divides the distance between its end-points in the propor tion I : I. The center of gravity of a triangle divides the distance between any vertex and the midpoint of the opposite side in the proportion 2 : 1. Should we not sus pect that the center of gravity of a homogeneous tetra hedron divides the distance between any vertex and the center of gravity of the opposite face in the proportion 3: 1? It appears extremely unlikely that the conjectures sug gested by these questions should be wrong, that such a beautiful regularity should be spoiled. The feeling that harmonious simple order cannot be deceitful guides the discoverer both in the mathematical and in the other sciences, and is expressed by the Latin saying: simplex sigillum veri (simplicity is the seal of truth) . [The preceding suggests an extension ton dimensions. It appears unlikely that what is true in the first three dimensions, for n = 1, 2, 3, should cease to be true for higher values of n. This conjecture is an "inference by induction"; it illustrates that induction is naturally based on analogy. See INDUCTION AND MATHEMATICAL INDUC• TION.] [11. We finish the present section by considering briefly the most important cases in which analogy attains the precision of mathematical ideas. (I) Two systems of mathematical objects, sayS and S', are so connected that certain relations between the ob jects of S are governed by the same laws as those between the objects of S'. Auxiliary Elements This kind of analogy between S and S' is exemplified by what we have discussed under I; take as S the sides of a rectangle, asS' the faces of a rectangular parallelepiped. (II) There is a one-one correspondence between the objects of the two systems S and S', preserving certain relations. That is, if such a relation holds between the objects of one system, the same relation holds between the corresponding objects of the other system. Such a connection between two systems is a very precise sort of analogy; it is called isomorphism (or holohedral iso morphism). (III) There is a one-many correspondence between the objects of the two systems S and S' preserving certain relations. Such a connection (which is important in vari ous branches of advanced mathematical study, especially in the Theory of Groups, and need not be discussed here in detail) is called merohedral isomorphism (or homo morphism; homoiomorphism would be, perhaps, a better term). Merohedral isomorphism may be considered as another very precise sort of analogy.] Auxiliary elements. There is much more in our con ception of the problem at the end of our work than was in it as We started working (PROGRESS AND ACHIEVEMENT, 1) . As our work progresses, we add new elements to those originally considered. An element that we introduce in the hope that it will further the solution is called an auxiliary element. 1. There are various kinds of auxiliary elements. Solv ing a geometric problem, we may introduce new lines into our figure, auxiliary lines. Solving an algebraic prob lem, we may introduce an auxiliary unknown (AUXILIARY PROBLEMS, I) • An auxiliary theorem is a theorem whose proof we undertake in the hope of promoting the solution of our original problem. Auxiliary Elements 47 2. There are various reasons for introducing auxiliary elements. We are glad when we have succeeded in recol lecting a problem related to ours and solved before. It is probable that we can use such a problem but we do not know yet how to use it. For instance, the problem which we are trying to solve is a geometric problem, and the related problem which we have solved before and have now succeeded in recollecting is a problem about tri angles. Yet there is no triangle in our figure; in order to make any use of the problem recollected we must have a triangle; therefore, we have to introduce one, by adding suitable auxiliary lines to our figure. In general, having recollected a formerly solved related problem and wish ing to use it for our present one, we must often ask: Should we introduce some auxiliary element in order to make its use possible? (The example in section 10 is typical.) Going back to definitions, we have another opportu nity to introduce auxiliary elements. For instance, expli cating the definition of a circle we should not only mention its center and its radius, but we should also introduce these geometric elements into our figure. With out introducing them, we could not make any concrete use of the definition; stating the definition without drawing something is mere lip-service. Trying to use known results and going back to defini tions are among the best reasons for introducing auxil iary elements; but they are not the only ones. We may add auxiliary elements to the conception of our problem in order to make it fuller, more suggestive, more familiar although we scarcely know yet explicitly how we shall be able to use the elements added. We may just feel that it is a "bright idea" to conceive the problem that way with such and such elements added. We may have this or that reason for introducing an Auxiliary Elements auxiliary element, but we should have some reason. We should not introduce auxiliary elements wantonly. 3· Example. Construct a triangle, being given one angle, the altitude drawn from the vertex of the given angle, and the perimeter of the triangle. A A p FIG. 10 We introduce suitable notation. Let a denote the given angle, h the given altitude drawn from the vertex A of a and p the given perimeter. We draw a figure in which we easily place a and h. Have we used all the data? No, our figure does not contain the given length p, equal to Auxiliary Elements 49 the perimeter of the triangle. Therefore we must intro duce p. But how? We may attempt to introduce p in various ways. The attempts exhibited in Figs. 9, 10 appear clumsy. If we try to make clear to ourselves why they appear so unsatis factory, we may perceive that it is for lack of symmetry. In fact, the triangle has three unknown sides a> b, c. We call a, as usual, the side opposite to A; we know that a+ b + c = p. Now, the sides band c play the same role; they are inter changeable; our problem is symmetric with respect to b and c. But b and c do not play the same role in our figures g, 10; placing the length p we treated b and c differently; the figures 9 and 10 spoil the natural sym metry of the problem with respect to band c. We should place p so that it has the same relation to b as to c. This consideration may be helpful in suggesting to place the length p as in Fig. 11. We add to the side a of A E c a FIG. II B c D the triangle the segment CE of length b on one side and the segment BD of the length c on the other side so that p appears in Fig. II as the line ED of length b +a+ c = p. If we have some little experience in solving problems of construction, we shall not fail to introduce into the Auxiliary Problem so figure, along with ED, the auxiliary lines AD and AE, each of which is the base of an isosceles triangle. In fact, it is not unreasonable to introduce elements into the problem which are particularly simple and familiar, as isosceles triangle. We have been quite lucky in introducing our auxiliary lines. Examining the new figure we may discover that LEAD has a simple relation to the given angle a. In fact, we find using the isosceles triangles t:,. ABD and t:,. ACE that LDAE = ~+ go 0 • After this remark, it is natural to 2 try the construction of ~ DAE. Trying this construction, we introduce an auxiliary problem which is much easier than the original problem. 4· Teachers and authors of textbooks should not forget that the intelligent student and THE INTELLIGENT READER are not satisfied by verifying that the steps of a reasoning are correct but also want to know the motive and the purpose of the various steps. The introduction of an auxiliary element is a conspicuous step. If a tricky auxiliary line appears abruptly in the figure, without any motivation, and solves the problem surprisingly, intelli gent students and readers are disappointed; they feel that they are cheated. Mathematics is interesting in so far as it occupies our reasoning and inventive powers. But there is nothing to learn about reasoning and invention if the motive and purpose of the most conspicuous step remain incomprehensible. To make such steps comprehensible by suitable remarks (as in the foregoing, under 3) or by carefully chosen questions and suggestions (as in sections 10, 18, 19, 20) takes a lot of time and effort; but it may be worth while. Auxiliary problem is a problem which we consider, not for its own sake, but because we hope that its con- Auxiliary Problem sideration may help us to solve another problem, our original problem. The original problem is the end we wish to attain, the auxiliary problem a means by which we try to attain our end. An insect tries to escape through the windowpane, tries the same again and again, and does not try the next window which is open and through which it came into the room. A man is able, or at least should be able, to act more intelligently. Human superiority consists in going around an obstacle that cannot be overcome directly, in devising a suitable auxiliary problem when the original problem appears insoluble. To devise an auxiliary prob lem is an important operation of the mind. To raise a clear-cut new problem subservient to another problem, to conceive distinctly as an end what is means to another end, is a refined achievement of the intelligence. It is an important task to learn (or to teach) how to handle auxiliary problems intelligently. 1. Example. Find x, satisfying the equation x4 - 13x2 + 36 = o. If we observe that x4 = (x2)2 we may see the advan tage of introducing y = x2. We obtain now a new problem: Find y, satisfying the equation y2- I3Y + 36 = o. The new problem is an auxiliary problem; we intend to use it as a means of solving our original problem. The unknown of our auxiliary problem, y, is appropriately called auxiliary unknown. 2. Example. Find the diagonal of a rectangular paral lelepiped being given the lengths of three edges drawn from the same corner. 52 Auxiliary Problem Trying to solve this problem (section 8) we may be led, by analogy (section 15), to another problem: Find the diagonal of a rectangular parallelogram being given the lengths of two sides drawn from the same vertex. The new problem is an auxiliary problem; we consider it because we hope to derive some profit for the original problem from its consideration. 3· Profit. The profit that we derive from the consider ation of an auxiliary problem may be of various kinds. We may use the result of the auxiliary problem. Thus, in example 1, having found by solving the quadratic equa tion for y that y is equal to 4 or to g, we infer that x2 = 4 or x2 = g and derive hence all possible values of x. In other cases, we may use the method of the auxiliary problem. Thus, in example 2, the auxiliary problem is a problem of plane geometry; it is analogous to, but sim pler than, the original problem which is a problem of solid geometry. It is reasonable to introduce an auxiliary problem of this kind in the hope that it will be instruc tive, that it will give us opportunity to familiarize our selves with certain methods, operations, or tools, which we may use afterwards for our original problem. In ex ample 2, the choice of the auxiliary problem is rather lucky; examining it closely we find that we can use both its method and its result. (See section 15, and DID YOU USE ALL THE DATA?) 4· Risk. We take away from the original problem the time and the effort that we devote to the auxiliary prob lem. If our investigation of the auxiliary problem fails, the time and effort we devoted to it may be lost. There fore, we should exercise our judgment in choosing an auxiliary problem. We may have various good reasons for our choice. The auxiliary problem may appear more accessible than the original problem; or it may appear Auxiliary Problem 53 instructive; or it may have some sort of aesthetic appeal. Sometimes the only advantage of the auxiliary problem is that it is new and offers unexplored possibilities; we choose it because we are tired of the original problem all approaches to which seem to be exhausted. 5· How to find one. The discovery of the solution of the proposed problem often depends on the discovery of a suitable auxiliary problem. Unhappily, there is no in fallible method of discovering suitable auxiliary prob lems as there is no infallible method of discovering the solution. There are, however, questions and suggestions which are frequently helpful, as LOOK AT THE UNKNOWN. We are often led to useful auxiliary problems by VARI ATION OF THE PROBLEM. 6. Equivalent problems. Two problems are equivalent if the solution of each involves the solution of the other. Thus, in our example 1, the original problem and the auxiliary problem are equivalent. Consider the following theorems: A. In any equilateral triangle, each angle is equal to 6o 0 • B. In any equiangular triangle, each angle is equal to 6o 0 • These two theorems are not identical. They contain different notions; one is concerned with equality of the sides, the other with equality of the angles of a triangle. But each theorem follows from the other. Therefore, the problem to prove A is equivalent to the problem to prove B. If we are required to prove A, there is a certain advan tage in introducing, as an auxiliary problem, the prob lem to prove B. The theorem B is a little easier to prove than A and, what is more important, we may foresee that B is easier than A, we may judge so, we may find plausible from the outset that B is easier than A. In fact, 54 Auxiliary Problem the theorem B, concerned only with angles, is more "homogeneous" than the theorem A which is concerned with both angles and sides. The passage from the original problem to the aux iliary problem is called convertible reduction, or bi lateral reduction, or equivalent reduction if these two problems, the original and the auxiliary, are equivalent. Thus, the reduction of A to B (see above) is convertible and so is the reduction in example 1. Convertible reduc tions are, in a certain respect, more important and more desirable than other ways to introduce auxiliary prob lems, but auxiliary problems which are not equivalent to the original problem may also be very useful; take example 2. 7· Chains of equivalent auxiliary problems are fre quent in mathematical reasoning. We are required to solve a problem A; we cannot see the solution, but we may find that A is equivalent to another problem B. Considering B we may run into a third problem C equiv alent to B. Proceeding in the same way, we reduce C to D, and so on, until we come upon a last problem L whose solution is known or immediate. Each problem being equivalent to the preceding, the last problem L must be equivalent to our original problem A. Thus we are able to infer the solution of the original problem A from the problem L which we attained as the last link in a chain of auxiliary problems. Chains of problems of this kind were noticed by the Greek mathematicians as we may see from an important passage of PAPPUS. For an illustration, let us reconsider our example 1. Let us call (A) the condition imposed upon the unknown x: (A) One way of solving the problem is to transform the pro- Auxiliary Problem 55 posed condition into another condition which we shall call (B) : (B) Observe that the conditions (A) and (B) are different. They are only slightly different if you wish to say so, they are certainly equivalent as you may easily convince yourself, but they are definitely not identical. The pas sage from (A) to (B) is not only correct but has a clear cut purpose, obvious to anybody who is familiar with the solution of quadratic equations. Working further in the same direction we transform the condition (B) into still another condition (C) : (C) Proceeding in the same way, we obtain (D) (E) (F) (G) (H) (2x 2 - 13)2 = 25 2x2- 13 = ±s x2 = 13 ± 5 2 x=±~I3:5 x = 3, or -3, or 2, or -2. Each reduction that we made was convertible. Thus, the last condition (H) is equivalent to the first condition (A) so that 3, -3, 2, -2 are all possible solutions of our original equation. In the foregoing; we derived from an original condi tion (A) a sequence of conditions (B), (C), (D), ... each of which was equivalent to the foregoing. This point deserves the greatest care. Equivalent conditions are satisfied by the same objects. Therefore, if we pass from a proposed condition to a new condition equivalent Auxiliary Problem to it, we have the same solutions. But if we pass from a proposed condition to a narrower one, we lose solutions, and if we pass to a wider one we admit improper, adven titious solutions which have nothing to do with the pro posed problem. If, in a series of successive reductions, we pass to a narrower and then again to a wider condition we may lose track of the original problem completely. In order to avoid this danger, we must check carefully the nature of each newly introduced condition: Is it equiv alent to the original condition? This question is still more important when we do not deal with a single equa tion as here but with a system of equations, or when the condition is not expressed by equations as, for instance, in problems of geometric construction. (Compare PAPPus, especially comments 2, 3, 4, .8. The description on p. 143, lines 4-21, is unnecessarily re stricted; it describes a chain of "problems to find," each of which has a different unknown. The example con sidered here has just the opposite speciality: all problems of the chain have the same unknown and differ only in the form of the condition. Of course, no such restriction is necessary.) 8. Unilateral reduction. We have two problems, A and B, both unsolved. If we could solve A we could hence derive the full solution of B. But not conversely; if we could solve B, we would obtain, possibly, some informa tion about A,
