# Auto Chapter 6

but we would not know how to derive the full solution of A from that of B. In such a case, more is achieved by the solution of A than by the solution of B. Let us call A the more ambitious, and B the less ambi tious of the two problems. If, from a proposed problem, we pass either to a more ambitious or to a less ambitious auxiliary problem we call the step a unilateral reduction. There are two kinds of unilateral reduction, and both are, in some way or Bernard Bolzano 57 other, more risky than a bilateral or convertible re duction. Our example 2 shows a unilateral reduction to a less ambitious problem. In fact, if we could solve the original problem, concerned with a parallelepiped whose length, width, and height are a, b, c respectively, we could move on to the auxiliary problem putting c = o and obtaining a parallelogram with length a and width b. For another example of a unilateral reduction to a less ambitious problem see SPECIALIZATION, 3, 4, 5· These examples show that, with some luck, we may be able to use a less am bitious auxiliary problem as a stepping stone, combining the solution of the auxiliary problem with some appro priate supplementary remark to obtain the solution of the original problem. Unilateral reduction to a more ambitious problem may also be successful. (See GENERALIZATION, 2, and the reduc tion of the first to the second problem considered in INDUCTION AND MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION, I, 2.) In fact, the more ambitious problem may be more accessible; this is the INVENTOR'S PARADOX. Bolzano, Bernard (1781-1848), logician and mathema tician, devoted an extensive part of his comprehensive presentation of logic, Wissenschaftslehre, to the subject of heuristic (vol. 3, pp. 293-575). He writes about this part of his work: "I do not think at all that I am able to present here any procedure of investigation that was not perceived long ago by all men of talent; and I do not promise at all that you can find here anything quite new of this kind. But I shall take pains to state in clear words the rules and ways of investigation which are followed by all able men, who in most cases are not even conscious of following them. Although I am free from the illusion that I shall fully succeed even in doing this, I still hope Bright Idea that the little that is presented here may please some people and have some application afterwards." Bright idea, or "good idea," or "seeing the light," is a colloquial expression describing a sudden advance toward the solution; see PROGRESS AND ACHIEVEMENT, 6. The com ing of a bright idea is an experience familiar to every body but difficult to describe and so it may be interesting to notice that a very suggestive description of it has been incidentally given by an authority as old as Aristotle. Most people will agree that conceiving a bright idea is an "act of sagacity." Aristotle defines "sagacity" as fol lows: "Sagacity is a hitting by guess upon the essential connection in an inappreciable time. As for example, if you see a person talking with a rich man in a certain way, you may instantly guess that that person is trying to borrow money. Or observing that the bright side of the moon is always toward the sun, you may suddenly per ceive why this is; namely, because the moon shines by the light of the sun." 1 The first example is not bad but rather trivial; not much sagacity is needed to guess things of this sort about rich men and money, and the idea is not very bright. The second example, however, is quite impressive if we make a little effort of imagination to see it in its proper setting. We should realize that a contemporary of Aristotle had to watch the sun and the stars if he wished to know the time since there were no wristwatches, and had to ob serve the phases of the moon if he planned traveling by night since there were no street lights. He was much better acquainted with the sky than the modern city- 1 The text is slightly rearranged . For a more exact translation see William Whewell, The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences (1847), vol. n, p. 131. Can You Check the Result? 59 dweller, and his natural intelligence was not dimmed by undigested fragments of journalistic presentations of astronomical theories. He saw the full moon as a flat disc, similar to the disc of the sun but much less bright. He must have wondered at the incessant changes in the shape and position of the moon. He observed the moon occa sionally also at daytime, about sunrise or sunset, and found out "that the bright side of the moon is always toward the sun" which was in itself a respectable achieve ment. And now he perceives that the varying aspects of the moon are like the various aspects of a ball which is illuminated from one side so that one half of it is shiny and the other half dark. He conceives the sun and the moon not as flat discs but as round bodies, one giving and the other receiving the light. He understands the essential connection, he rearranges his former concep tions instantly, "in an inappreciable time": there is a sudden leap of the imagination, a bright idea, a flash of genius. Can you check the result? Can you check the argu ment? A good answer to these questions strengthens our trust in the solution and contributes to the solidity of our knowledge. 1. Numerical results of mathematical problems can be tested by comparing them to observed numbers, or to a commonsense estimate of observable numbers. As prob lems arising from practical needs or natural curiosity almost always aim at facts it could be expected that such comparisons with observable facts are seldom omitted. Yet every teacher knows that students achieve incredible things in this respect. Some students are not disturbed at all when they find 16,130 ft. for the length of the boat and 8 years, 2 months for the age of the captain who is, by the way, known to be a grandfather. Such neglect of 6o Can You Check the Result? the obvious does not show necessarily stupidity but rather indifference toward artificial problems. 2. Problems "in letters" are susceptible of more, and more interesting, tests than "problems in numbers" (sec tion 14). For another example, let us consider the frustum of a pyramid with square base. If the side of the lower base is a, the side of the upper base b, and the altitude of the frustum h, we find for the volume a2 + ab + b2 - - - - -h . 3 We may test this result by SPECIALIZATION. In fact, if b =a the frustum becomes a prism and the formula yields a2h; and if b = o the frustum becomes a pyramid a2h 3 and the formula yields-. We may apply the TEST BY DIMENSION. In fact, the expression has as dimension the cube of a length. Again, we may test the formula by variation of the data. In fact, if any one of the positive quantities a, b or h increases the value of the expression increases. Tests of this sort can be applied not only to the final result but also to intermediate results. They are so useful that it is worth while preparing for them; see VARIATION OF THE PROBLEM, 4· In order to be able to use such tests, we may find advantage in generalizing a "problem in numbers" and changing it into a "problem in letters"; see GENERALIZATION, 3· 3· Can you check the argument? Checking the argu ment step by step, we should avoid mere repetition. First, mere repetition is apt to become boring, uninstructive, a strain on the attention. Second, where we stumbled once, there we are likely to stumble again if the circumstances are the same as before. If we feel that it is necessary to go again through the whole argument step by step, we should Can You Derive the Result Differently? 61 at least change the order of the steps, or their grouping, to introduce some variation. 4· It requires less exertion and is more interesting to pick out the weakest point of the argument and examine it first. A question very useful in picking out points of the argument that are worth while examining is: DID YOU USE ALL THE DATA? 5· It is clear that our nonmathematical knowledge can not be based entirely on formal proofs. The more solid part of our everyday knowledge is continually tested and strengthened by our everyday experience. Tests by ob servation are more systematically conducted in the nat ural sciences. Such the form of careful experiments and measurements, and are combined with mathematical reasoning in the physical sciences. Can our knowledge in mathematics be based on formal proofs alone? tests take This is a philosophical question which we cannot de bate here. It is certain that your knowledge, or my knowl edge, or your students' knowledge in mathematics is not based on formal proofs alone. If there is any solid knowl edge at all, it has a broad experimental basis, and this basis is broadened by each problem whose result is successfully tested. Can you derive the result differently? When the solu tion that we have finally obtained is long and involved, we naturally suspect that there is some clearer and less roundabout solution: Can you derive the result differ ently? Can you see it at a glance? Yet even if we have succeeded in finding a satisfactory solution we may still be interested in finding another solution. We desire to con vince ourselves of the validity of a theoretical result by two different derivations as we desire to perceive a mate rial object through two different senses. Having found a 62 Can You Derive the Result Differently? proof, we wish to find another proof as we wish to touch an object after having seen it. Two proofs are better than one. "It is safe riding at two anchors." 1. Example. Find the area S of the lateral surface of the frustum of a right circular cone, being given the radius of the lower baseR, the radius of the upper baser, and the altitude h. This problem can be solved by various procedures. For instance, we may know the formula for the lateral surface of a full cone. As the frustum is generated by cutting off from a cone a smaller cone, so its lateral surface is the difference of two full conical surfaces; it remains to ex press these in terms of R, r, h. Carrying through this idea, we obtain finally the formula S = 1r( R + r) V ( R - r )2 + h2 • Having found this result in some way or other, after longer calculation, we may desire a clearer and less roundabout argument. Can you derive the result differ ently? Can you see it at a glance? Desiring to see intuitively the whole result, we may begin with trying to see the geometric meaning of its parts. Thus, we may observe that V(R- r) 2 + h2 is the length of the slant height. (The slant height is one of the nonparallel sides of the isosceles trapezoid that, revolving about the line joining the midpoints of its parallel sides, generates the frustum; see Fig. 12.) Again, we may discover that 1r(R + r) is the arithmetic mean of the perimeters of the two bases Can You Derive the Result Differently? 63 of the frustum. Looking at the same part of the formula, we may be moved to write it also in the form 1r(R + r) = 21r R + r 2 that is the perimeter of the mid-section of the frustum. (We call here mid-section the intersection of the frustum with a plane which is parallel both to the lower base and to the upper base of the frustum and bisects the altitude.) FIG. 12 Having found new interpretations of various parts, we may see now the whole formula in a different light. We may read it thus: Area = Perimeter of mid-section X Slant height. We may recall here the rule for the trapezoid: Area= Middle-line X Altitude. (The middle-line is parallel to the two parallel sides of the trapezoid and bisects the altitude.) Seeing intuitively the analogy of both statements, that about the frustum and that about the trapezoid, we see the whole result about the frustum "almost at a glance." That is, we feel Can You Use the Result? that we are very near now to a short and direct proof of the result found by a long calculation. 2. The foregoing example is typical. Not entirely satis fied with our derivation of the result, we wish to improve it, to change it. Therefore, we study the result, trying to understand it better, to see some new aspect of it. We may succeed first in observing a new interpretation of a certain small part of the result. Then, we may be lucky enough to discover some new mode of conceiving some other part. Examining the various parts, one after the other, and trying various ways of considering them, we may be led finally to see the whole result in a different light, and our new conception of the result may suggest a new proof. It may be confessed that all this is more likely to hap pen to an experienced mathematician dealing with some advanced problem than to a beginner struggling with some elementary problem. The mathematician who has a great deal of knowledge is more exposed than the begin ner to the danger of mobilizing too much knowledge and framing an unnecessarily involved argument. But, as a compensation, the experienced mathematician is in a better position than the beginner to appreciate the rein terpretation of a small part of the result and to proceed, accumulating such small advantages, to recasting ulti mately the whole result. Nevertheless, it can happen even in very elementary classes that the students present an unnecessarily com plicated solution. Then, the teacher should show them, at least once or twice, not only how to solve the problem more shortly but also how to find, in the result itself, indications of a shorter solution. See also REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM AND INDIRECT PROOF. Can you use the result? To find the solution of a prob lem by our own means is a discovery. If the problem is Can You Use the Result? not difficult, the discovery is not so momentous, but it is a discovery nevertheless. Having made some discovery, however modest, we should not fail to inquire whether there is something more behind it, we should not miss the possibilities opened up by the new result, we should try to use again the procedure used. Exploit your success! Can you use the result, or the method, for some other problem? 1. We can easily imagine new problems if we are some what familiar with the principal means of varying a problem, as GENERALIZATION, SPECIALIZATION, ANALOGY, DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBINING. We start from a proposed problem, we derive from it others by the means we just mentioned, from the problems we obtained we derive still others, and so on. The process is unlimited in theory but, in practice, we seldom carry it very far, because the problems that we obtain so are apt to be inaccessible. On the other hand we can construct new problems which we can easily solve using the solution of a problem previously solved; but these easy new problems are apt to be uninteresting. To find a new problem which is both interesting and accessible, is not so easy; we need experience, taste, and good luck. Yet we should not fail to look around for more good problems when we have succeeded in solving one. Good problems and mushrooms of certain kinds have something in common; they grow in clusters. Hav ing found one, you should look around; there is a good chance that there are some more quite near. 2. We are going to illustrate some of the foregoing points by the same example that we discussed in sections 8, 10, 12, 14, 15. Thus we start from the following problem: Given the three dimensions (length, breadth, and height) of a rectangular parallelepiped, find the diagonal. If we know the solution of this problem, we can easily 66 Can You Use the Result? solve any of the following problems (of which the first two were almost stated in section 14). Given the three dimensions of a rectangular parallele piped, find the radius of the circumscribed sphere. The base of a pyramid is a rectangle of which the cen ter is the foot of the altitude of the pyramid. Given the altitude of the pyramid and the sides of its base, find the lateral edges. Given the rectangular coordinates (x 1 , y1 , z1 ), (x 2 , y2 , z2 ) of two points in space, find the distance of these points. We solve these problems easily because they are scarcely different from the original problem whose solution we know. In each case, we add some new notion to our orig inal problem, as circumscribed sphere, pyramid, rectan gular coordinates. These notions are easily added and easily eliminated, and, having got rid of them, we fall back upon our original problem. The foregoing problems have a certain interest be cause the notions that we introduced into the original problem are interesting. The last problem, that about the distance of two points given by their coordinates, is even an important problem because rectangular coordinates are important. 3· Here is another problem which we can easily solve if we know the solution of our original problem: Given the length, the breadth, and the diagonal of a rectangu lar parallelepiped, find the height. In fact, the solution of our original problem consists essentially in establishing a relation among four quanti ties, the three dimensions of the parallelepiped and its diagonal. If any three of these four quantities are given, we can calculate the fourth from the relation. Thus, we can solve the new problem. We have here a pattern to derive easily solvable new Can You Use the Result? problems from a problem we have solved: we regard the original unknown as given and one of the original data as unknown. The relation connecting the unknown and the data is the same in both problems, the old and the new. Having found this relation in one, we can use it also in the other. This pattern of deriving new problems by in terchang ing the roles is very different from the pattern followed under 2. 4· Let us now derive some new problems by other means. A natural generalization of our original problem is the following: Find the diagonal of a parallelepiped, being given the three edges issued from an end-point of the diagonal, and the three angles between these three edges. By specialization we obtain the following problem: Find the diagonal of a cube with given edge. We may be led to an inexhaustible variety of problems by analogy. Here are a few derived from those considered under 2: Find the diagonal of a regular octahedron with given edge. Find the radius of the circumscribed sphere of a regular tetrahedron with given edge. Given the geo graphical coordinates, latitude and longitude, of two points on the earth's surface (which we regard as a sphere) find their spherical distance. All these problems are interesting but only the one obtained by specialization can be solved immediately on the basis of the solution of the original problem. 5· We may derive new problems from a proposed one by considering certain of its elements as variable. A special case of a problem mentioned under 2 is to find the radius of a sphere circumscribed about a cube whose edge is given. Let us regard the cube, and the com mon center of cube and sphere as fixed, but let us vary 68 Carrying Out the radius of the sphere. If this radius is small, the sphere is contained in the cube. As the radius increases, the sphere expands (as a rubber balloon in the process of being inflated). At a certain moment, the sphere touches the faces of the cube; a little later, its edges; still later the sphere passes through the vertices. Which values does the radius assume at these three critical moments? 6. The mathematical experience of the student is in complete if he never had an opportunity to solve a prob lem invented by himself. The teacher may show the der ivation of new problems from one just solved and, doing so, provoke the curiosity of the students. The teacher may also leave some part of the invention to the students. For instance, he may tell about the expanding sphere we just discussed (under 5) and ask: "What would you try to calculate? Which value of the radius is particularly interesting?" Carrying out. To conceive a plan and to carry it through are two different things. This is true also of mathematical problems in a certain sense; between carry ing out the plan of the solution, and conceiving it, there are certain differences in the character of the work. 1. We may use provisional and merely plausible argu ments when devising the final and rigorous argument as we use scaffolding to support a bridge during construc tion. When, however, the work is sufficiently advanced we take off the scaffolding, and the bridge should be able to stand by itself. In the same way, when the solution is sufficiently advanced, we brush aside all kinds of provi sional and merely plausible arguments, and the result should be supported by rigorous argument alone. Devising the plan of the solution, we should not be too afraid of merely plausible, heuristic reasoning. Anything is right that leads to the right idea. But we have to Carrying Out 6g change this standpoint when we start carrying out the plan and then we should accept only conclusive, strict arguments. Carrying out your plan of the solution check each step. Can you see clearly that the step is correct? The more painstakingly we check our steps when carry ing out the plan, the more freely we may use heuristic reasoning when devising it. 2. We should give some consideration to the order in which we work out the details of our plan, especially if our problem is complex. We should not omit any detail, we should understand the relation of the detail before us to the whole problem, we should not lose sight of the connection of the major steps. Therefore, we should proceed in proper order. In particular, it is not reasonable to check minor de tails before we have good reasons to believe that the major steps of the argument are sound. If there is a break in the main line of the argument, checking this or that secondary detail would be useless anyhow. The order in which we work out the details of the argument may be very different from the order in which we invented them; and the order in which we write down the details in a definitive exposition may be still different. Euclid's Elements present the details of the argument in a rigid systematic order which was often imitated and often criticized. 3· In Euclid's exposition all arguments proceed in the same direction: from the data toward the unknown in "problems to find," and from the hypothesis toward the conclusion in "problems to prove." Any new element, point, line, etc., has to be correctly derived from the data or from
