# Auto Chapter 7

elements correctly derived in foregoing steps. Any new assertion has to be correctly proved from the hypothesis or from assertions correctly proved in fore going steps. Each new element, each new assertion is 70 Carrying Out examined when it is encountered first, and so it has to be examined just once; we may concentrate all our attention upon the present step, we need not look behind us, or look ahead. The very last new element whose derivation we have to check, is the unknown. The very last assertion whose proof we have to examine, is the conclusion. If each step is correct, also the last one, the whole argument is correct. The Euclidean way of exposition can be highly recom mended, without reservation, if the purpose is to examine the argument in detail. Especially, if it is our own argu ment, and it is long and complicated, and we have not only found it but have also surveyed it on large lines so that nothing is left but to examine each particular point in itself, then nothing is better than to write out the whole argument in the Euclidean way. The Euclidean way of exposition, however, cannot be recommended without reservation if the purpose is to convey an argument to a reader or to a listener who never heard of it before. The Euclidean exposition is ex cellent to show each particular point but not so good to show the main line of the argument. THE INTELLIGENT READER can easily see that each step is correct but has great difficulty in perceiving the source, the purpose, the connection of the whole argument. The reason for this difficulty is that the Euclidean exposition fairly often proceeds in an order exactly opposite to the natural order of invention. (Euclid's exposition follows rigidly the order of "synthesis"; see PAPPUS, especially comments 3· 4· 5·) 4· Let us sum up. Euclid's rrianner of exposition, pro- gressing relentlessly from the data to the unknown and from the hypothesis to the conclusion, is perfect for checking the argument in detail but far from being per fect for making understandable the main line of the argument. Carrying Out It is highly desirable that the students should examine their own arguments in the Euclidean manner, proceed ing from the data to the unknown, and checking each step although nothing of this kind should be too rigidly enforced. It is not so desirable that the teacher should present many proofs in the pure Euclidean manner, al though the Euclidean presentation may be very useful after a discussion in which, as is recommended by the present book, the students guided by the teacher discover the main idea of the solution as independently as pos sible. Also desirable seems to be the m anner adopted by some textbooks in which an intuitive sketch of the main idea is presented first and the details in the Euclidean order of exposition afterwards. 5· ·wishing to satisfy himself that his propositiOn is true, the conscientious ma thematician tries to see it in tuitively and to give a formal proof. Can you see clearly that it is correct? Can you prove that it is correct? The conscientious mathematician acts in this respect like the lady who is a conscientious shopper. Wishing to satisfy herself of the quality of a fabric, she wants to see it and to tou ch it. Intuitive insight and formal proof are two different ways of p erceiving the truth, comparable to the perception of a material object through two different senses, sight and touch. Intuitive insight may rush far ahead of formal proof. Any intelligent student, without any systematic knowl edge of solid geometry, can see as soon as he has clearly understood the terms that two straight lines parallel to the same straight line are parallel to each other (the three lines may or may not be in the same plane). Yet the proof of this statement, as given in proposition g of the 11th book of Euclid's Elements, needs a long, careful, and ingenious preparation. Formal manipulation of logical rules and algebraic formulas may get far ahead of intuition. Almost every- Condition body can see at once t:hat 3 straight lines, taken at ran dom, divide the plane into 7 parts (look at the only finite part, the triangle included by the 3 lines) . Scarcely anybody is able to see, even straining his attention to the utmost, that 5 planes, taken at random, divide space into 26 parts. Yet it can be rigidly proved that the right num ber is actually 26, and the proof is not even long or difficult. Carrying out our plan, we check each step. Checking our step, we may rely on intuitive insight or on formal rules. Sometimes the intuition is ahead, sometimes the formal reasoning. It is an interesting and useful exercise to do it both ways. Can you see clearly that the step is correct? Yes, I can see it clearly and distinctly. Intuition is ahead; but could formal reasoning overtake it? Can you also PROVE that it is correct? Trying to prove formally what is seen intuitively and to see intuitively what is proved formally is an invigor ating mental exercise. Unfortunately, in the classroom there is not always enough time for it. The example, discussed in sections 12 and 14, is typical in this respect. Condition is a principal part of a "problem to find." See PROBLEMS TO FIND, PROBLEMS TO PROVE, 3· See also TERMS, NEW AND OLD, 2. A condition is called redundant if it contains super fluous parts. It is called contradictory if its parts are mutually opposed and inconsistent so that there is no object satisfying the condition. Thus, if a condition is expressed by more linear equa tions than there are unknowns, it is either redundant or contradictory; if the condition is expressed by fewer equations than there are unknowns, it is insufficient to determine the unknowns; if the condition is expressed by just as many equations as there are unknowns it is Something Useful from the Data 73 usually just sufficient to determine the unknowns but may be, in exceptional cases, contradictory or insufficient. Contradictory. See coNDITION. Corollary is a theorem which we find easily in examin ing another theorem just found. The word is of Latin origin; a more literal translation would be "gratuity" or "tip." Could you derive something useful from the data? We have before us an unsolved problem, an open ques tion. We have to find the connection between the data and the unknown. We may represent our unsolved prob lem as open space between the data and the unknown, as a gap across which we have to construct a bridge. We can start constructing our bridge from either side, from the unknown or from the data. Look at the unknown! And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar unknown. This suggests starting the work from the unknown. Look a t the d ata! Could you derive something useful from the data? This suggests starting the work from the data. It appears that starting the reasoning from the un known is usually preferable (see PAPPUS and woRKING BACKWARDS) . Yet the alternative start, fr om the data, also h as chances of success, must often be tried, and deserves illustration. Example. We are given three points A, B, and C. Draw a line through A which passes between B and C and is at equal distances from B and C. What are the data? Three points, A , B , and C, are given in position. We draw a figure, exhibiting the data (Fig. 13). 74 Something Useful from the Data What is the unknown? A straight line. What is the condition? The required line passes through A, and passes between B and C, at the same dis tance from each. We assemble the unknown and the data B • e c FIG. 13 in a figure exhibiting the required relations (Fig. 14). Our figure, suggested by the definition of the distance of a point from a straight line, shows the right angles in volved by this definition. FIG. I4 The figure, as it is plotted, is still "too empty." The unknown straight line is still unsatisfactorily connected with the data A, B, and C. The figure needs some aux iliary line, some addition-but what? A fairly good stu- Decomposing and Recombining 75 dent can get stranded here. There are, of course, various things to try, but the best question to refloat him is: Could you derive something useful from the data? In fact, what are the data? The three points exhibited in Fig. 13, nothing else. We have not yet used sufficiently the points B and C; we have to derive something useful from them. But what can you do with just two points? Join them by a straight line. So, we draw Fig. 15. 8 • c FIG. 15 If we superpose Fig. 14 and Fig. 15, the solution may appear in a flash: There are two right triangles, they are congruent, there is an all-important new point of inter section. Could you restate the problem? Could you restate it still differently? These questions aim at suitable VARIA TION OF THE PROBLE M. Go back to definitions. See DEFINITION. Decomposing and recombining are important opera tions of the mind. You examine an object that touches your interest or challenges your curiosity: a house you intend to rent, an Decomposing and Recombining important but cryptic telegram, any object whose pur pose and origin puzzle you, or any problem you intend to solve. You have an impression of the object as a whole but this impression, possibly, is not definite enough. A detail strikes you, and you focus your attention upon it. Then, you concentrate upon another detail; then, again, upon another. Various combinations of details may pre sent themselves and after a while you again consider the object as a whole but you see it now differently. You de compose the whole into its parts, and you recombine the parts into a more or less different whole. 1. If you go into detail you may lose yourself in de tails. Too many or too minute particulars are a burden on the mind. They may prevent you from giving suffi cient attention to the main point, or even from seeing the main point at all. Think of the man who cannot see the forest for the trees. Of course, we do not wish to waste our time with un necessary detail and we should reserve our effort for the essential. The difficulty is that we cannot say beforehand which details will turn out ultimately as necessary and which will not. Therefore, let us, first of all, understand the problem as a whole. Having understood the problem, we shall be in a better position to judge which particular points may be the most essential. Having examined one or two essential points we shall be in a better position to judge which further details might deserve closer examination. Let us go into detail and decompose the problem gradu ally, but not further than we need to. Of course, the teacher cannot expect that all students should act wisely in this respect. On the contrary, it is a very foolish and bad habit with some students to start working at details before having understood the problem as a whole. Decomposing and Recombining 77 2. We are going to consider mathematical problems, "problems to find." Having understood the problem as a whole, its aim, its main point, we wish to go into detail. Where should we start? In almost all cases, it is reasonable to begin with the consideration of the principal parts of the problem which are the unknown, the data, and the condition. In almost all cases it is advisable to start the detailed ex amination of the problem with the questions: What is the unknown? What are the data? What is the condition? If we wish to examine further details, what should we do? Fairly often, it is advisable to examine each datum by itself, to separate the various parts of the condition, and to examine each part by itself. We may find it necessary, especially if our problem is more difficult, to decompose the problem still further, and to examine still more remote details. Thus, it may be necessary to go back to the definition of a certain term, to introduce new elements involved by the definition, and to examine the elements so introduced. 3· After having decomposed the problem, we try to recombine its elements in some new manner. Especially, we may try to recombine the elements of the problem into some new, more accessible problem which we could possibly use as an auxiliary problem. There are, of course, unlimited possibilities of recom bination. Difficult problems demand hidden, exceptional, original combinations, and the ingenuity of the problem solver shows itself in the originality of the combination. There are, however, certain usual and relatively simple sorts of combinations, sufficient for simpler problems, which we should know thoroughly and try first, even if we may be obliged eventually to resort to less obvious means. There is a formal classification in which the most usual Decomposing and Recombining and useful combinations are neatly placed. In construc ting a new problem from the proposed problem, we may ( 1) keep the unknown and change the rest (the data and the condition); or (2) keep the data and change the rest (the unknown and the condition); or (3) change both the unknown and the data. We are going to examine these cases. [The cases (1) and (2) overlap. In fact, it is possible to keep both the unknown and the data, and transform the problem by changing the form of the condition alone. For instance, the two following problems, although visi bly equivalent, are not exactly the same: Construct an equilateral triangle, being given a side. Construct an equiangular triangle, being given a side. The difference of the two statements which is slight in the present example m ay be momentous in other cases. Such cases are even important in certain respects but it would take up too much space to discuss them here. Compare AUXILIARY PROBLEMS, 7, last remark.] 4· Keeping the unknown and changing the data and the condition in order to transform the proposed prob lem is often useful. The suggestion LOOK AT THE UN KNOWN aims at problems with the same unknown. We may try to recollect a formerly solved problem of this kind: And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar unknown. Failing to remember such a problem we may try to invent one: Could you think of other data appropriate to determine the unknown? A new problem which is more closely related to the proposed problem has a better chance of being useful. Therefore, keeping the unknown, we try to keep also some data and some part of the condition, and to change, as little as feasible, only one or two data and a small part of the condition. A good method is one in which we omit Decomposing and Recombining 79 something without adding anything; we keep the un known, keep only a part of the condition, drop the other part, but do not introduce any new clause or datum. Examples and comments on this case follow under 7, 8. 5· Keeping the data, we may try to introduce some use ful and more accessible new unknown. Such an unknown must be obtained from the original data and we have such an unknown in mind when we ask: couLD You DE RIVE SOMETHING USEFUL FROM THE DATA? Let us observe that two things are here desirable. First, the new unknown should be more accessible, that is, more easily obtainable from the data than the original unknown. Second, the new unknown should be useful, that is, it should be, when found, capable of rendering some definite service in the search of the original un known. In short, the new unknown should be a sort of stepping stone. A stone in the middle of the creek is nearer to me than the other bank which I wish to arrive at and, when the stone is reached, it helps me on toward the other bank. The new unknown should be both accessible and use ful but, in practice, we must often content ourselves with less. If nothing better presents itself, it is not unreason able to derive something from the data that has some chance of being useful; and it is also reasonable to try a new unknown which is closely connected with the orig inal one, even if it does not seem particularly accessible from the outset. For instance, if our problem is to find the diagonal of a parallelepiped (as in section 8) we may introduce the diagonal of a face as new unknown. We may do so either because we know that if we have the diagonal of the face we can also obtain the diagonal of the solid (as in sec tion 10); or we may do so because we see that the diagonal of the face is easy to obtain and we suspect that So Decomposing and Recombining it might be useful in finding the diagonal of the solid. (Compare DID YOU USE ALL THE DATA? 1.) If our problem is to construct a circle, we have to find two things, its center and its radius; our problem has two parts, we may say. In certain cases, one part is more accessible than the other and therefore, in any case, we may reasonably give a moment's consideration to this possibility: Could you solve a part of the problem? Ask ing this, we weigh the chances: Would it pay to concen trate just upon the center, or just upon the radius, and to choose one or the other as our new unknown? Ques tions of this sort are very often useful. In more complex or in more advanced problems, the decisive idea often consists in carving out some more accessible but essential part from the problem. 6. Changing both the unknown and the data we devi ate more from our original course than in the foregoing cases. This, naturally, we do not like; we sense the dan ger of losing the original problem altogether. Yet we may be compelled to such an extensive change if less radical changes have failed to produce something accessible and useful, and we may be tempted to recede so far from our original problem if the new problem has a good chance of success. Could you change the unknown, or the data} or both if necessary} so that the new unknown and the new data are nearer to each other? An interesting way of changing both the unknown and the data is interchanging the unknown with one of the data. (See CAN YOU USE THE RESULT? 3·) 7· Example. Construct a triangle, being given a side a} the altitude h perpendicular to a, and the angle a oppo site to a. What is the unknown? A triangle. What are the data? Two lines, a and h, and an angle a. Now, if we are somewha t familiar with problems of Decomposing and Recombining geometric construction, we try to reduce such a problem to the construction of a point. We draw a line BC equal to the given side a; then all that we have to find is the vertex of the triangle A, opposite to a, see Fig. 16. We have, in fact, a new problem. A , , , h , ~ , ~ , , , a FIG. 16 / , , ; ~ ; , B . . . . • • • ' \ \ . \ ' . c What is the unknown? The point A. What are the data? A line h, an angle a, and two points Band C given in position. What is the condition? The perpendicular distance of the point A from the line BC should be h and LBAC =a. In fact, we have transformed our problem, changing both the unknown and the data. The new unknown is a point, the old unknown was a triangle. Some of the data are the same in both problems, the line h and the angle a; but in the old problem we were given a length a and now we are given two points, B and C, instead. The new problem is not difficult. The following sug gestion brings us quite near to the solution. Separate the various parts of the condition. The con dition has two parts, one concerned with the datum h, the other with the datum a . The unknown point is required to be Decomposing and Recombining (I) at distance h from the line BC; and (ll) the vertex of an angle of given magnitude a, whose sides pass through the given points B and C. If we keep only one part of the condition and drop the other jJart, the unknown point is not completely deter mined. There are many points satisfying part (I) of the condition, namely all points of a parallel to the line BC at the distance h from BC.2 This parallel is the locus of the points satisfying part (I) of the condition. The locus of the points satisfying part (II) is a certain circular arc whose end-points are Band C. We can describe both loci; their intersection is the point that we desired to con struct. The procedure that we have just applied has a certain interest; solving problems of geometric construction, we can often follow successfully its pattern: Reduce the problem to the construction of a point, and construct the point as an intersection of two loci. But a certain step of this procedure has a still more general interest; solving "problems to find" of any kind, we can follow its pattern: Keep only a part of the condi tion, drop the other part. Doing so, we weaken the con dition of the proposed problem, we restrict less the unknown. How far is the unknown then determined, how can it vary? By asking this, we set, in fact, a new problem. If the unknown is a point in the plane (as it was in our example) the solution of this new problem consists in determining a locus described by the point. If the unknown is a mathematical object of some other kind (it was a square in section 18) we have to describe properly and to characterize precisely a certain set of objects. Even if the unknown is not a m athematical 2 The plane is bisected by the line through B and C. We choose one of the halfplanes to construct A in it, and so \Me may consider just one parallel to BC; otherwise, we should consider two such parallels. Decomposing and Recombining object (as in the next example, under 8) it may be useful to consider, to characterize, to describe, or to list those objects which satisfy a certain part of the condition im posed upon the unknown by the proposed problem. 8. Example. In a crossword puzzle that allows puns and anagrams we find the following clue: "Forward and backward part of a machine (5 letters)." What is the unknown? A word. What is the condition? The word has 5 letters. It has something to do with some part of some machine. It should be, of course, an English word, and not a too unusual one, let us hope. Is the condition sufficient to determine the unknown? No. Or, rather, the condition may be sufficient but that part of the condition which is clear by now is certainly insufficient. There are too many words satisfying it, as "lever," or "screw," or what not. The condition
