# Auto Chapter 8

is ambiguously expressed-on purpose, of course. If nothing can be found that could be plausibly described as a "forward part" of a machine and would be a "backward part" too, we may suspect that forward and backward reading might be meant. It may be a good idea to examine this interpretation of the clue. Separate the various parts of the condition. The con dition has two parts, one concerned with the meaning of the word, the other with its spelling. The unknown word is required to be (I) a short word meaning some part of some machine; (II) a word with 5 letters which spelled backward give again a word meaning some part of some machine. If we keep only one part of the condition and drop the other part, the unknown is not completely determined. There are many words satisfying part (I) of the condi tion, we have a sort of locus. We may "describe" this locus (I), "follow" it to its "intersection" with locus Decomposing and Recombining (II). The natural procedure is to concentrate upon part (I) of the condition, to recollect words having the pre scribed meaning and, when we have succeeded in recol lecting some such word, to examine whether it has or has not the prescribed length and can or cannot be read backward. We may have to recollect several words before we run into the right one: lever, screw, wheel, shaft, hinge, motor. Of course, "rotor" I g. Under 3, we classified the possibilities of obtaining a new "problem to find" by recombining certain ele ments of a proposed "problem to find." If we do not in troduce just one new problem, but two or more new problems, there are more possibilities which we have to mention but do not attempt to classify. Still other possibilities may arise. Especially, the solu tion of a "problem to find" may depend on the solution of a "problem to prove." We just mention this important possibility; considerations of space prevent us from dis cussing it. 10. Only few and short remarks can be added concern ing "problems to prove"; they are analogous to the foregoing more extensive comments on "problems to find" ( 2 to g) . Having understood such a problem as a whole, we should, in general, examine its principal parts. The principal parts are the hypothesis and the conclusion of the theorem that we are required to prove or to disprove. We should understand these parts thoroughly: What is the hypothesis? What is the conclusion? If there is need to get down to more particular points, we may separate the various parts of the hypothesis, and consider each part by itself. Then we may proceed to other details, decomposing the problem further and further. Definition After having decomposed the problem, we may try to recombine its elements in some new manner. Especially, we may try to recombine the elements into another theorem. In this respect, there are three possibilities. (1) We keep the conclusion and change the hypoth esis. We first try to recollect such a theorem: Look at the conclusion! And try to think of a familiar theorem hav ing the same or a similar conclusion. If we do not succeed in recollecting such a theorem we try to invent one: Could you think of another hypothesis from which you could easily derive the conclusion? We may change the hypothesis by omitting something without adding anything: Keep only a part of the hypothesis, drop the other part; is the conclusion still valid? ( 2) We keep the hypothesis and change the conclu sion: Could you derive something useful from the hy pothesis? (3) We change both the hypothesis and the conclu sion. We may be more inclined to change both if we have had no success in changing just one. Could you change the hypothesis, or the conclusion, or both if necessary, so that the new hypothesis and the new con clusion are nearer to each other? We do not attempt to classify here the various pos sibilities which arise when, in order to solve the proposed "problem to prove," we introduce two or more new "problems to prove," or when we link it up with an appropriate "problem to find." Definition of a term is a statement of its meaning in other terms which are supposed to be well known. 1. Technical terms in mathematics are of two kinds. Some are accepted as primitive terms and are not defined. Others are considered as derived terms and are defined in due form; that is, their meaning is stated in primitive 86 Definition terms and in formerly defined derived terms. Thus, we do not give a formal definition of such primitive notions as point, straight line, and plane.s Yet we give formal definitions of such notions as "bisector of an angle" or "circle" or "parabola." The definition of the last quoted term may be stated as follows. We call parabola the locus of points which are at equal distance from a fixed point and a fixed straight line. The fixed point is called the focus of the parabola, the fixed line its directrix. It is understood that all ele ments considered are in a fixed plane, and that the fixed point (the focus) is not on the fixed line (the directrix). The reader is not supposed to know the meaning of the terms defined: parabola, focus of the parabola, directrix of the parabola. But he is supposed to know the meaning of all the other terms as point, straight line, plane, distance of a point from another point, fixed, locus, etc. 2. Definitions in dictionaries are not very much differ ent from mathematical definitions in the outward form but they are written in a different spirit. The writer of a dictionary is concerned with the cur rent meaning of the words. He accepts, of course, the current meaning and states it as neatly as he can in form of a definition. The mathematician is not concerned with the current meaning of his technical terms, at least not primarily concerned with that. What "circle" or "parabola" or other technical terms of this kind may or may not denote in ordinary speech matters little to him. The mathemati cal definition creates the mathematical meaning. sIn this respect, ideas have changed since the time of Euclid and his Greek followers who defined the point, the straight line, and the plane. Their "definitions" however are scarcely formal definitions, rather intuitive illustrations of a sort. Illustrations, of course, are allowed, and even very desirable in teaching. Definition 3· Example. Construct the point of intersection of a given straight line and a parabola of which the focus and the directrix are given. Our approach to any problem must depend on the state of our knowledge. Our approach to the present problem depends mainly on the extent of our acquaint ance with the properties of the parabola. If we Jmow much about the parabola we try to make use of our knowledge and to extract something helpful from it: Do you know a theorem that could be useful? Do you know a related problem? If we know little about parabola, focus, and directrix, these terms are rather embarrassing and we naturally wish to get rid of them. How can we get rid of them? Let us listen to the dialogue of the teacher and the student discussing the proposed problem. They have chosen already a suitable notation: P for any of the unknown points of intersection, F for the focus, d for the directrix, c for the straight line intersecting the parabola. "And what is the unknown?" "The point P." "What are the data?" "The straight lines c and d, and the point F." "What is the condition?" "P is a point of intersection of the straight line c and of the parabola whose directrix is d and focus F." "Correct. You had little opportunity, I know, to study the parabola but you can say, I think, what a parabola is." "The parabola is the locus of points equidistant from the focus and the directrix." "Correct. You remember the definition correctly. That is right, but we must also use it; go back to definitions. By virtue of the definition of the parabola, what can you say about your point P?" 88 Definition "Pis on the parabola. Therefore, Pis equidistant from d and F." "Good! Draw a figure." d Q FIG. 17 The student introduces into Fig. 17 the lines PF and PQ, this latter being the perpendicular to d from P. "Now, could you restate the problem?" "Could you restate the condition of the problem, using the lines you have just introduced?" "P is a point on the line c such that PF = PQ." "Good. But please, say it in words: What is PQ?" "The perpendicular distance of P from d." "Good. Could you restate the problem now? But please, state it neatly, in a round sentence." "Construct a point P on the given straight line c at equal distances from the given point F and the given straight line d." "Observe the progress from the original statement to your restatement. The original statement of the problem was full of unfamiliar technical terms, parabola, focus, directrix; it sounded just a little pompous and inflated. And now, nothing remains of those unfamiliar technical terms; you have deflated the problem. \Veil done!" Definition Sg 4· Elimination of technical terms is the result of the work in the foregoing example. We started from a state ment of the problem containing certain technical terms (parabola, focus, directrix) and we arrived finally at a restatement free of those terms. In order to eliminate a technical term we must know its definition; bui it is not enough to know the defini tion, we must use it. In the foregoing example, it was not enough to remember the definition of the parabola. The decisive step was to introduce into the figure the lines PF and PQ whose equality was granted by the definition of the parabola. This is the typical procedure. We intro duce suitable elements into the conception of the prob lem. On the basis of the definition, we establish relations between the elements we introduced. If these relations express completely the meaning, we have used the defini tion. Having used its definition, we have eliminated the technical term. The procedure just described may be called going back to definitions. By going back to the definition of a technical term, we get rid of the term but introduce new elements and new relations instead. The resulting change in our conception of the problem may be important. At any rate, some restatement, some VARIATION OF THE PROBLEM is bound to result. 5· Definitions and known theorems. If we know the name "parabola" and have some vague idea of the shape of the curve but do not know anything else about it, our knowledge is obviously insufficient to solve the problem proposed as example, or any other serious geometric problem about the parabola. What kind of knowledge is needed for such a purpose? The science of geometry may be considered as con sisting of axioms, definitions, and theorems. The parab- go Definition ola is not mentioned in the axioms which deal only with such primitive terms as point, straight line, and so on. Any geometric argumentation concerned with the parabola, the solution of any problem involving it, must use either its definition or theorems about it. To solve such a problem, we must know, at least, the definition but it is better to know some theorems too. What we said about the parabola is true, of course, of any derived notion. As we start solving a problem that involves such a notion, we cannot know yet what will be preferable to use, the definition of the notion, or some theorem about it; but it is certain that we have to use one or the other. There are ca&es, however, in which we have no choice. If we know just the definition of the notion, and nothing else, then we are obliged to use the definition. If we do not know much more than the definition, our best chance may be to go back to the definition. But if we know many theorems about the notion, and have much experience in its use, there is some chance that we may get hold of a suitable theorem involving it. 6. Several definitions. The sphere is usually defined as the locus of points at a given distance from a given point. (The points are now in space, not restricted to a plane.) Yet the sphere could also be defined as the surface de scribed by a circle revolving about a diameter. Still other definitions of the sphere are known, and many others possible. When we have to solve a proposed problem involving some derived notion, as "sphere" or "parabola," and we wish to go back to its definition, we may have a choice among various definitions. Much may depend in such a case on choosing the definition that fits the case. To find the area of the surface of the sphere was, at the time Archimedes solved it, a great and difficult problem. Definition gt Archimedes had the choice between the definitions of the sphere we just quoted. He preferred to conceive the sphere as the surface generated by a circle revolving about a fixed diameter. He inscribes in the circle a regu lar polygon, with an even number of sides, of which the fixed diameter joins opposite vertices. The regular poly gon approximates the circle and, revolving with the circle, generates a convex surface composed of two cones with vertices at the extremities of the fixed diameter and of several frustums of cones in between. This composite surface approximates the sphere and is used by Archi medes in computing the area of the surface of the sphere. If we conceive the sphere as the locus of points equally distant from the center, no such simple approximation to its surface is suggested. 7· Going back to definitions is important in inventing an argument but it is also important in checking it. Somebody presents an alleged new solution of Archi medes' problem of finding the area of the surface of the sphere. If he has only a vague idea of the sphere, his solution will not be any good. He may have a clear idea of the sphere but if he fails to use this idea in his argu ment I cannot know that he had any idea at all, and his argument is no good. Therefore, listening to the argu ment, I am waiting for the moment when he is going to say something substantial about the sphere, to use its definition or some theorem about it. If such a moment never comes, the solution is no good. We should check not only the arguments of others but, of course, also our own arguments, in the same way. Have you taken into account all essential notions in volved in the problem? How did you use this notion? Did you use its meaning, its definition? Did you use essential facts, known theorems about it? That going back to definitions is important in examin- 92 Descartes ing the validity of an argument was emphasized by Pascal who stated the rule: "Substituer mentalement les defini tions a la place des definis." The meaning is: "Substitute mentally the defining facts for the defined terms." That going back to definitions is also important in devising an argument was emphasized by Hadamard. 8. Going back to definitions is an important operation of the mind. If we wish to understand why the defini tions of words are so important, we should realize first that words are important. We can hardly use our mind without using words, or signs, or symbols of some sort. Thus, words and signs have power. Primitive peoples believe that words and symbols have magic power. We may under stand such belief but we should not share it. We should know that the power of a word does not reside in its sound, in the "vocis flatus," in the "hot air" produced by the speaker, but in the ideas of which the word re minds us and, ultimately, in the facts on which the ideas are based. Therefore, it is a sound tendency to seek meaning and facts behind the words. Going back to definitions, the mathematician seeks to get hold of the actual relations of mathematical objects behind the technical terms, as the physicist seeks definite experiments behind his tech nical terms, and the common man with some common sense wants to get down to hard facts and not to be fooled by mere words. Descartes, Rene (1596-1650), great mathematician and philosopher, planned to give a universal method to solve problems but he left unfinished his Rules for the Direc tion of the Mind. The fragments of this treatise, found in his manuscripts and printed after his death, contain more-and more interesting-materials concerning the solution of problems than his better known work Dis- Determination, Hope, Success 93 cours de la Methode although the "Discours" was very likely written after the "Rules." The following lines of Descartes seem to describe the origin of the "Rules": "As a young man, when I heard about ingenious inventions, I tried to invent them by myself, even without reading the author. In doing so, I perceived, by degrees, that I was making use of certain rules." Determination, hope, success. It would be a mistake to think that solving problems is a purely "intellectual affair"; determination and emotions play an important role. Lukewarm determination and sleepy consent to do a little something may be enough for a routine problem in the classroom. But, to solve a serious scientific prob lem, will power is needed that can outlast years of toil and bitter disappointments. 1. Determination fluctuates with hope and hopeless ness, with satisfaction and disappointment. It is easy to keep on going when we think that the solution is just around the corner; but it is hard to persevere when we do not see any way out of the difficulty. We are elated when our forecast comes true. We are depressed when the way we have followed with some confidence is sud denly blocked, and our determination wavers. "Il n'est point besoin esperer pour entreprendre ni reussir pour perseverer." "You can undertake without hope and persevere without success." Thus may speak an inflexible will, or honor and duty, or a nobleman with a noble cause. This sort of determination, however, would not do for the scientist, who should have some hope to start with, and some success to go on. In scientific work, it is necessary to apportion wisely determination to outlook. You do not take up a problem, unless it has some interest; you settle down to work seriously if the problem seems instructive; you throw in your whole 94 Diagnosis personality if there is a great promise. If your purpose is set, you stick to it, but you do not make it unnecessarily difficult for yourself. You do not despise little successes, on the contrary, you seek them: If you cannot solve the proposed problem try to solve first some related problem. 2. When a student makes really silly blunders or is exasperatingly slow, the trouble is almost always the same; he has no desire at all to solve the problem, even no desire to understand it properly, and so he has not understood it. Therefore, a teacher wishing seriously to help the student should, first of all, stir up his curiosity, give him some desire to solve the problem. The teacher should also allow some time to the student to make up his mind, to settle down to his task. Teaching to solve problems is education of the will. Solving problems which are not too easy for him, the student learns to persevere through unsuccess, to appre ciate small advances, to wait for the essential idea, to concentrate with all his might when it appears. If the student had no opportunity in school to familiarize himself with the varying emotions of the struggle for the solution his mathematical education failed in the most vital point. Diagnosis is used here as a technical term in education meaning "closer characterization of the student's work." A grade characterizes the student's work but somewhat crudely. The teacher, wishing to improve the student's work, needs a closer characterization of good and bad points as the physician, wishing to improve the patient's health, needs a diagnosis. We are here particularly concerned with the student's efficiency in solving problems. How can we characterize it? We may derive some profit from the distinction of the Did You Use All the Data? 95 four phases of the solution. In fact, the behavior of the students in the various phases is quite characteristic. Incomplete understanding of the problem, owing to lack of concentration, is perhaps the most widespread deficiency in solving problems. With respect to devising a plan and obtaining a general idea of the solution two opposite faults are frequent. Some students rush into calculations and constructions without any plan or gen eral idea; others wait clumsily for some idea to come and cannot do anything that would accelerate its coming. In carrying out the plan, the most frequent fault is careless ness, lack of patience in checking each step. Failure to check the result at all is very frequent; the student is glad to get an answer, throws down his pencil, and is not shocked by the most unlikely results. The teacher, having made a careful diagnosis of a fault of this kind, has some chance to cure it by insisting on certain questions of the list. Did you use all the data? Owing to the progressive mo bilization of our knowledge, there will be much more in our conception of the problem at the end than was in it at the outset (PROGRESS AND ACHIEVEMENT, 1). But how is it now? Have we got what we need? Is our conception adequate? Did you use all the data? Did you use the whole condition? The corresponding question concerning "problems to prove" is: Did you use the whole hy pothesis? 1. For an illustration, let us go back to the "parallele piped problem" stated in section 8 (and followed up in sections 10, 12, 14, 15). It may happen that a student runs into the idea of calculating the diagonal of a face, y a2 + 7)2, but then he gets stuck. The teacher may help him by asking: Did you use all the data? The student can scarcely fail to observe that the expression y a2 + b 2 g6 Did You Use All the Data? does not contain the third datum c. Therefore, he should try to bring c into play. Thus, he has a good chance to legs are observe y a 2 + b2 and c, and whose hypotenuse is the desired diagonal of the parallelepiped. (For another illustration see AUXILIARY ELEMENTS, 3·) the decisive right triangle whose The questions we discuss here are very important. Their use in constructing the solution is clearly shown by the foregoing example. They may help us to find the weak spot in our conception of the problem. They may point out a missing element. When we know that a cer tain element is still missing, we naturally try to bring it into play. Thus, we have a clue, we have a definite line of inquiry to follow, and have a good chance to meet with the decisive idea. 2. The questions we discussed are helpful not only in constructing an argument but also in checking it. In order to be more concrete, let us assume that we have to check the proof of a theorem whose hypothesis consists of three parts, all three essential to
