# Auto Chapter 9

the truth of the theorem. That is, if we discard any part of the hypothe sis, the theorem ceases to be true. Therefore, if the proof neglects to use any part of the hypothesis, the proof must be wrong. Does the proof use the whole hypothesis? Does it use the first part of the hypothesis? Where does it use the first part of the hypothesis? Where does it use the second part? Where the third? Answering to all these questions we check the proof. This sort of checking is effective, instructive, and al most necessary for thorough understanding if the argu ment is long and heavy-as THE INTELLIGENT READER should know. 3· The questions we discussed aim at examining the completeness of our conception of the problem. Our con ception is certainly incomplete if we fail to take into Did You Use All the Data? 97 account any essential datum or condition or hypothesis. But it is also incomplete if we fail to realize the meaning of some essential term. Therefore, in order to examine our conception, we should also ask: Have you taken into account all essential notions involved in the problem? See DEFINITION, 7· 4· The foregoing remarks, however, are subject to cau tion and certain limitations. In fact, their straightfor ward application is restricted to problems which are "perfectly stated" and "reasonable." A perfectly stated and reasonable "problem to find" must have all necessary data and not a single superfluous datum; also its condition must be just sufficient, neither contradictory nor redundant. In solving such a problem, we have to use, of course, all the data and the whole condition. The object of a "problem to prove" is a mathematical theorem. If the problem is perfectly stated and reason able, each clause in the hypothesis of the theorem must be essential to the conclusion. In proving such a theorem we have to use, of course, each clause of the hypothesis. Mathematical problems proposed in traditional text books are supposed to be perfectly stated and reasonable. We should however not rely too much on this; when there is the slightest doubt, we should ask: IS IT POSSIBLE TO SATISFY THE CONDITION? Trying to answer this ques tion, or a similar one, we may convince ourselves, at least to a certain extent, that our problem is as good as it is supposed to be. The question stated in the title of the present article and allied questions may and should be asked without modification only when we know that the problem before us is reasonable and perfectly stated or when, at least, we have no reason to suspect the contrary. 5· There are some nonmathematical problems which g8 Do You Know a Related Problem? may be, in a certain sense, "perfectly stated." For in stance, good chess problems are supposed to have but one solution and no superfluous piece on the chess board, etc. PRACTICAL PROBLEMS however are usually far from being perfectly stated and require a thorough reconsid eration of the questions discussed in the present article. Do you know a related problem? vVe can scarcely imagine a problem absolutely new, unlike and unrelated to any formerly solved problem; but, if such a problem could exist, it would be insoluble. In fact, when solving a problem, we always profit from previously solved prob lems, using their result, or their method, or the experi ence we acquired solving them. And, of course, the problems from which we profit must be in some way related to our present problem. Hence the question: Do you know a related problem? There is usually no difficulty at all in recalling for merly solved problems which are more or less related to our present one. On the contrary, we may find too many such problems and there may be difficulty in choosing a useful one. We have to look around for closely related problems; we LOOK AT THE UNKNOWN, or we look for a formerly solved problem which is linked to our present one by GENERALIZATION, SPECIALIZATION, Or ANALOGY. The question we discuss here aims at the mobilization of our formerly acquired knowledge (PROGRESS AND ACHIEVEMENT, 1) . An essential part of our mathematical knowledge is stored in the form of formerly proved theorems. Hence the question: Do you know a theorem that could be useful? This question may be particularly suitable when our problem is a "problem to prove," that is, when we have to prove or disprove a proposed theorem. 99 Draw a figure; see FIGURES. Introduce suitable nota Examine Your Guess tion; see NOTATION. Examine your guess. Your guess may be right, but it is foolish to accept a vivid guess as a proven truth-as primitive people often do. Your guess may be wrong. But it is also foolish to disregard a vivid guess altogether-as pedantic people sometimes do. Guesses of a certain kind deserve to be examined and taken seriously: those which occur to us after we have attentively considered and really understood a problem in which we are genuinely interested. Such guesses usually contain at least a frag ment of the truth although, of course, they very seldom show the whole truth. Yet there is a chance to extract the whole truth if we examine such a guess appropriately. Many a guess has turned out to be wrong but never theless useful in leading to a better one. No idea is really bad, unless we are uncritical. What is really bad is to have no idea at all. 1. Don't. Here is a typical story about Mr. John Jones. Mr. Jones works in an office. He had hoped for a little raise but his hope, as hopes often are, was disappointed. The salaries of some of his colleagues were raised but not his. Mr. Jones could not take it calmly. He worried and worried and finally suspected that Director Brown was responsible for his failure in getting a raise. We cannot blame Mr. Jones for having conceived such a suspicion. There were indeed some signs pointing to Director Brown. The real mistake was that, after having conceived that suspicion, Mr. Jones became blind to all signs pointing in the opposite direction. He worried him self into firmly believing that Director Brown was his personal enemy and behaved so stupidly that he almost succeeded in making a real enemy of the director. The trouble with Mr. John Jones is that he behaves 100 Examine Your Guess like most of us. He never changes his major opinions. He changes his minor opinions not infrequently and quite suddenly; but he never doubts any of his opinions, major or minor, as long as he has them. He never doubts them, or questions them, or examines them critically-he would especially hate critical examination, if he understood what that meant. Let us concede that Mr. John Jones is right to a certain extent. He is a busy man; he has his duties at the office and at home. He has little time for doubt or examina tion . At best, he could examine only a few of his con victions and why should he doubt one if he has no time to examine that doubt? Still, don't do as Mr. John Jones does. Don't let your suspicion, or guess, or conjecture, grow without exami nation till it becomes ineradicable. At any rate, in theo retical matters, the best of ideas is hurt by uncritical acceptance and thrives on critical examination. 2. A mathematical example. Of all quadrilaterals with given perimeter, find the one that has the greatest area. What is the unknown? A quadrilateral. What are th e data? The perimeter of the quadrilateral is gi ven. TV hat is the condition? The required quadrilateral should have a greater area than any other quadrilateral with the same perimeter. This problem is very different from the usual prob lems in elementary geometry and, therefore, it is quite natural to start guessing. Which quadrilateral is likely to be the one with the greatest area? \Vhat would be the simplest guess? We may have heard that of all figures with the same p erimeter the circle has the greatest area; we may even suspect some r eason for the plausibility of this sta te.Jent. Now, which quad rilateral comes nearest to the cir cle? Which one comes nearest to it in symmetry? Examine Your Guess 101 The square is a pretty obvious guess. If we take this guess seriously, we should realize what it means. We should have the courage to state it: "Of all quadrilaterals with given perimeter the square has the greatest area." If we decide ourselves to examine this statement, the situation changes. Originally, we had a "problem to find." After having formulated our guess, we have a "problem to prove"; we have to prove or disprove the theorem formulated. If we do not know any problem similar to ours that has been solved before, we may find our task pretty tough. If you cannot solve the proposed problem, try to solve first some related problem. Could you solve a part of the problem? It may occur to us that if the square is priv ileged among quadrilaterals it must, by that very fact, also be privileged among rectangles. A part of our prob lem would be solved if we could succeed in proving the following statement: "Of all rectangles with given perim eter the square has the greatest area." This theorem appears more accessible than the former; it is, of course, weaker. At any rate, we should realize what it means; we should have the courage to restate it in more detail. We can restate it advantageously in the language of algebra. The area of a rectangle with adjacent sides a and b is ab. Its perimeter is 2a + 2b. One side of the square that has the same perimeter as the rectangle just mentioned is a + b. Thus, the area of this square is (a -;- by. It should be greater than the 2 area of the rectangle, and so we should have (a-;- b)z > ab. Is this true? The same assertion can be written in the 102 Examine Your Guess equivalent form a2 + 2ab + b2 > 4ab. This, however, is true, for it is equivalent to or to a2 - 2ab + b2 > o (a- b)2 > o and this inequality certainly holds, unless a = b, that is, the rectangle examined is a square. "\Ve have not solved our problem yet, but we have made some progress just by facing squarely our rather obvious guesses. 3· A nonmathematical example. In a certain crossword puzzle we have to find a word with seven letters, and the clue is: "Do the walls again, back and forth."4 What is the unknown? A word. What are the data? The length of the word is given; it has seven letters. What is the condition? It is stated in the clue. It has something to do with walls, yet it is still very hazy. Thus, we have to reexamine the clue. As we do so, the last part may catch our attention: " ... again, back and forth." Could you solve a part of the problem? Here is a chance to guess the beginning of the word. Since the repetition is so strongly emphasized, the word, quite possibly, might start with "re." This is a pretty obvious guess. If we are tempted to believe it, we should realize what it means. The word required would look thus: RE----- Can you check the result? If another word of the puz zle crosses the one just considered in the first letter, we have an R to start that other word. It may be a good idea 4 Th e Nation, June g, 1945, Crossword Puzzle, No. 119. Figures 103 to switch to that other word and check the R. If we succeed in verifying that R or if, at least, we do not find any reason against it, we come back to our original word. We ask again: What is the condition? As we reexamine the clue, the very last part may catch our attention: " ... back and forth." Could this imply that the word we seek can be read not only forward but backward? This is a less obvious guess (yet there are such cases, see DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBINING, 8) . At any rate, let us face this guess; let us realize what it means. The word would look as follows: RE --- ER. Moreover, the third letter should be the same as the fifth; it is very likely a consonant and the fourth or middle letter a vowel. The reader can now easily guess the word by himself. If nothing else helps, he can try all the vowels, one after the other, for the letter in the middle. Figures are not only the object of geometric problems but also an important help for all sorts of problems in which there is nothing geometric at the outset. Thus, we have two good reasons to consider the role of figures in solving problems. 1. If our problem is a problem of geometry, we have to consider a figure. This figure may be in our imagina tion, or it may be traced on paper. On certain occasions, it might be desirable to imagine the figure without draw ing it; but if we have to examine various details, one detail after the other, it is desirable to draw a figure. If there are many details, we cannot imagine all of them simultaneously, but they are all together on the paper. A detail pictured in our imagina tion may be forgotten; but the detail traced on paper remains, and, when we 104 Figures come back to it, it reminds us of our previous remarks, it saves us some of the trouble we have in recollecting our previous consideration. 2. We now consider more specially the use of figures in problems of geometric construction. We start the detailed consideration of such a problem by drawing a figure containing the unknown and the data, all these elements being assembled as it is pre scribed by the condition of the problem. In order to understand the problem distinctly, we have to consider each datum and each part of the condition separately; then we reunite all parts and consider the condition as a whole, trying to see simultaneously the various connec tions required by the problem. We would scarcely be able to handle and separate and recombine all these details without a figure on paper. On the other hand, before we have solved the problem definitively, it remains doubtful whether such a figure can be drawn at all. Is it possible to satisfy the whole con dition imposed by the problem? We are not entitled to say Yes before we have obtained the definitive solution; nevertheless we begin with assuming a figure in which the unknown is connected with the data as prescribed by the condition. It seems that, drawing the figure, we have made an unwarranted assumption. No, we have not. Not necessarily. We do not act incor rectly when, examining our problem, we consider the p ossibility that ther e is an object that satisfies the con dition imposed upon the unknown and has, with all the data, the required relations, provided we do not confuse mere possibility with certainty. A judge does not act in correctly when, questioning the defendant, he considers the h ypothesis that the defendant perpetrated the crime in question, provided he does not commit himself to this hypothesis. Both the mathematician and the judge may examine a possibility without prejudice, postponing their Figures judgment till the examination yields some definite re sult. The method of starting the examination of a problem of construction by drawing a sketch on which, sup posedly, the condition is satisfied, goes back to the Greek geometers. It is hinted by the short, somewhat enigmatic phrase of Pappus: Assume what is required to be done as already done. The following recommendation is some what less terse but clearer: Draw a hypothetical figure which supposes the condition of the problem satisfied in all its parts. This is a recommendation for problems of geometric construction but in fact there is no need to restrict us to any such particular kind of problem. We may extend the recommendation to all "problems to find" stating it in the following general form: Examine the hypothetical situation in which the condition of the problem is sup posed to be fully satisfied. Compare PAPPUS, 6. 3· Let us discuss a few points about the actual drawing of figures. (I) Shall we draw the figures exactly or approxi mately, with instruments or free-hand? Both kinds of figures have their advantages. Exact figures have, in principle, the same role in geometry as exact measurements in physics; but, in practice, exact figures are less important than exact measurements be cause the theorems of geometry are much more exten sively verified than the laws of physics. The beginner, however, should construct many figures as exactly as he can in order to acquire a good experimental basis; and exact figures may suggest geometric theorems also to the more advanced. Yet, for the purpose of reasoning, care fully drawn free-hand figures are usually good enough, and they are much more quickly done. Of course, the figure should not look absurd; lines supposed to be 106 Figures straight should not be wavy, and so-called circles should not look like potatoes. An inaccurate figure can occasionally suggest a false conclusion, but the danger is not great and we can pro tect ourselves from it by various means, especially by varying the figure. There is no danger if we concentrate upon the logical connections and realize that the figure is a help, but by no means the basis of our conclusions; the logical connections constitute the real basis. [This point is instructively illustrated by certain well known paradoxes which exploit cleverly the intentional inac curacy of the figure.] (II) It is important that the elements are assembled in the required relations, it is unimportant in which order they are constructed. Therefore, choose the most convenient order. For example, to illustrate the idea of trisection, you wish to draw two angles, a and [3, so that a = 3/3· Starting from an arbitrary a, you cannot con struct f3 with ruler and compasses. Therefore, you choose a fairly small, but otherwise arbitrary f3 and, starting from f3, you construct a which is easy. (III) Your figure should not suggest any undue spe cialization. The different parts of the figure should not exhibit apparent relations not required by the problem. Lines should not seem to be equal, or to be perpendicu lar, when they are not necessarily so. Triangles should not seem to be isosceles, or right-angled, when no such property is required by the problem. The triangle having the angles 45°, 6o 0 , 75° is the one which, in a precise sense of the word, is the most "remote" both from the isosceles, and from the right-angled shape. 5 You draw 5 If the angles of a triangle are a, (3, "'' and goo > a > (3 > "'' (3, (3- 'Y is < 15°, then at least one of the differences goo - a, a - unless a = 75 °, (3=6o 0 , "1=45°· In fact, 3 (goo - a) + 2 (a- fJ) + ((3- 'Y) 6 0 = 15. Figures 107 this, or a not very different triangle, if you wish to con sider a "general" triangle. (IV) In order to emphasize the different roles of dif ferent lines, you may use heavy and light lines, contin uous and dotted lines, or lines in different colors. You draw a line very lightly if you are not yet quite decided to use it as an auxiliary line. You may draw the given elements with red pencil, and use other colors to em phasize important parts, as a pair of similar triangles, etc. (V) In order to illustrate solid geometry, shall we use three-dimensional models, or drawings on paper and blackboard? Three-dimensional models are desirable, but trouble some to make and expensive to buy. Thus, usually, we must be satisfied with drawings although it is not easy to make them impressive. Some experimentation with self-made cardboard models is very desirable for begin ners. It is helpful to take objects of our everyday sur roundings as representations of geometric notions. Thus, a box, a tile, or the classroom may represent a rectangu lar parallelepiped, a pencil, a circular cylinder, a lamp shade, the frustum of a right circular cone, etc. 4· Figures traced on paper are easy to produce, easy to recognize, easy to remember. Plane figures are especially familiar to us, problems about plane figures especially accessible. We may take advantage of this circumstance, we may use our aptitude for handling figures in handling nongeometrical objects if we contrive to find a suitable geometrical representation for those nongeometrical objects. In fact, geometrical representations, graphs and dia grams of all sorts, are used in all sciences, not only in physics, chemistry, and the natural sciences, but also in economics, and even in psychology. Using some suitable geometrical representation, we try to express everything 108 Generalization in the language of figures, to reduce all sorts of problems to problems of geometry. Thus, even if your problem is not a problem of geom etry, you may try to draw a figure. To find a lucid geo metric representation for your nongeometrical problem could be an important step toward the solution. Generalization is passing from the consideration of one object to the consideration of a set containing that ob ject; or passing from the consideration of a restricted set to that of a more comprehensive set containing the restricted one. 1. If, by some chance, we come across the sum 1 + 8 + 27 + 64 = 100 we may observe that it can be expressed in the curious form 13+23+33+43= 102, Now, it is natural to ask ourselves: Does it often happen that a sum of successive cubes as 13 + 23 + 3s + · • · + n3 is a square? In asking this, we generalize. This generaliza tion is a lucky one; it leads from one observation to a remarkable general law. Many results were found by lucky generalizations in mathematics, physics, and the natural sciences. See INDUCTION AND MATHEMATICAL IN DUCTION. 2. Generalization may be useful in the solution of problems. Consider the following problem of solid geom etry: "A straight line and a regular octahedron are given in position. Find a plane that passes through the given line and bisects the volume of the given octahedron." This problem may look difficult but, in fact, very little Generalization 109 familiarity with the shape of the regular octahedron is sufficient to suggest the following more general problem: "A straight line and a solid with a center of symmetry are given in position. Find a plane that passes through the given line and bisects the volume of the given solid." The plane required passes, of course, through the center of symmetry of the solid, and is determined by this point and the given line. As the octahedron has a center of symmetry, our original problem is also solved. The reader will not fail to observe that the second problem is more general than the first, and, nevertheless, much easier than the first. In fact, our main achievement in solving the first problem was to invent the second problem. Inventing the second problem, we recognize the role of the center of symmetry; we disentangled that property of the octahedron which is essential for the problem at hand, namely that it has such a center. The more general problem may be easier to solve. This sounds paradoxical but, after the foregoing example, it
