# Auto Chapter 10

should not be paradoxical to us. The main achievement in solving the special problem was to invent the general problem. After the main achievement, only a minor part of the work remains. Thus, in our case, the solution of the general problem is only a minor part of the solution of the special problem. See INVENTOR's PARADOX. 3· "Find the volume of the frustum of a pyramid with square base, being given that the side of the lower base is 10 in., the side of the upper base 5 in., and the altitude of the frustum 6 in." If for the numbers 10, 5· 6 we sub stitute letters, for instance a, b, h, we generalize. We obtain a more general problem than the original one, namely the following: "Find the volume of the frustum of a pyramid with square base, being given that the side of the lower base is a, the side of the upper base b, and 110 A Problem Related to Yours and Solved the altitude of the frustum h." Such generalization may be very useful. Passing from a problem "in numbers" to another one "in letters" we gain access to new proce dures; we can vary the data, and, doing so, we may check our results in various ways. See CAN YOU CHECK THE RESULT? 2, VARIATION OF THE PROBLEM, 4· Have you seen it before? It is possible that we have solved before the same problem that we have to do now, or that we have heard of it, or that we had a very similar problem. These are possibilities which we should not fail to explore. We try to remember what happened. Have you seen it before? Or have you seen the same prob lem in a slightly different form? Even if the answer is negative such questions may start the mobilization of useful knowledge. The question in the title of the present article is often used in a more general meaning. In order to obtain the solution, we have to extract relevant elements from our memory, we have to mobilize the pertinent parts of our dormant knowledge (PROGRESS AND ACHIEVEMENT). V\Te cannot know, of course, in advance which parts of our knowledge may be relevant; but there are certain pos sibilities which we should not fail to explore. Thus, any feature of the present problem that played a role in the solution of some other problem may play again a role. Therefore, if any feature of the present problem strikes us as possibly important, we try to recognize it. What is it? Is it familiar to you? Have you seen it before? Here is a problem related to yours and solved before. This is good news; a problem for which the solution is known and which is connected with our present problem, is certainly welcome. It is still more welcome if the con nection is close and the solution simple. There is a good A Problem Related to Yours and Solved 111 chance that such a problem will be useful in solving our present one. The situation that we are discussing here is typical and important. In order to see it clearly let us compare it with the situation in which we find ourselves when we are working at an auxiliary problem. In both cases, our aim is to solve a certain problem A and we introduce and consider another problem B in the hope that we may derive some profit for the solution of the proposed prob lem A from the consideration of that other problem B. The difference is in our relation to B. Here, we suc ceeded in recollecting an old problem B of which we know the solution but we do not know yet how to use it. There, we succeeded in inventing a new problem B; we know (or at least we suspect strongly) how to use B, but we do not know yet how to solve it. Our difficulty con cerning B makes all the difference between the two situ ations. When this difficulty is overcome, we may use B in the same way in both cases; we may use the result or the method (as explained in AUXILIARY PROBLEM, 3), and, if we are lucky, we may use both the result and the method. In the situation considered here, we know well the solu tion of B but we do not know yet how to use it. There fore, we ask: Could you use it? Could you use its result? Could you use its method? The intention of using a certain formerly solved prob lem influences our conception of the present problem. Trying to link up the two problems, the new and the old, we introduce into the new problem elements corre sponding to certain important elements of the old prob lem. For example, our problem is to determine the sphere circumscribed about a given tetrahedron. This is a problem of solid geometry. We may remember that we have solved before the analogous problem of plane geometry of constructing the circle circumscribed about 112 Heuristic a given triangle. Then we recollect that in the old prob lem of plane geometry, we used the perpendicular bi sectors of the sides of the triangle. It is reasonable to try to introduce something analogous into our present prob lem. Thus we may be led to introduce into our present problem, as corresponding auxiliary elements, the per pendicular bisecting planes of the edges of the tetra hedron. After this idea, we can easily work out the solution to the problem of solid geometry, following the analogous solution in plane geometry. The foregoing example is typical. The consideration of a formerly solved related problem leads us to the introduction of auxiliary elements, and the introduction of suitable auxiliary elements makes it possible for us to use the related problem to full advantage in solving our present problem. We aim at such an effect when, think ing about the possible use of a formerly solved related problem, we ask: Should you introduce some auxiliary element in order to make its use possible? Here is a theorem related to yours and proved before. This version of the remark discussed here is exemplified in section 19. Heuristic, or heuretic, or "ars inveniendi" was the name of a certain branch of study, not very clearly cir cumscribed, belonging to logic, or to philosophy, or to psychology, often outlined, seldom presented in detail, and as good as forgotten today. The aim of heuristic is to study the methods and rules of discovery and invention. A few traces of such study may be found in the com mentators of Euclid; a passage of PAPPUS is particularly interesting in this respect. The most famous attempts to build up a system of heuristic are due to DESCARTES and to LEIBNITZ, both great mathematicians and philosophers. Bernard BOLZANO presented a notable detailed account of Heuristic Reasoning heuristic. The present booklet is an attempt to revive heuristic in a modern and modest form. See MODERN HEURISTIC. Heuristic, as an adjective, means "serving to discover." Heuristic reasoning is reasoning not regarded as final and strict but as provisional and plausible only, whose purpose is to discover the solution of the present prob lem. We are often obliged to use heuristic reasoning. We shall attain complete certainty when we shall have ob tained the complete solution, but before obtaining cer tainty we must often be satisfied with a more or less plausible guess. We may need the provisional before we attain the final. We need heuristic reasoning when we construct a strict proof as we need scaffolding when we erect a building. See SIGNS oF PROGREss. Heuristic reasoning is often based on induction, or on analogy; see INDUCTION AND MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION, and ANALOGY, 8, g, 10.6 Heuristic reasoning is good in itself. What is bad is to mix up heuristic reasoning with rigorous proof. What is worse is to sell heuristic reasoning for rigorous proof. The teaching of certain subjects, especially the teach ing of calculus to engineers and physicists, could be essen tially improved if the nature of heuristic reasoning were better understood, both its advantages and its limitations openly recognized, and if the textbooks would present heuristic arguments openly. A heuristic argument pre sented with taste and frankness may be useful; it may prepare for the rigorous argument of which it usually contains certain germs. But a heuristic argument is likely to be harmful if it is presented ambiguously with visible 6 See also a paper hy the author in American l\fathematical Monthly, vol. 48, pp. 450-465. 114 Induction and Mathematical Induction hesitation between shame and pretension. See WHY PROOFS? If you cannot solve the proposed problem do not let this failure afflict you too much but try to find consola tion with some easier success, try to solve first some re lated problem; then you may find courage to attack your original problem again. Do n-.>t forget that human superi ority consists in going around an obstacle that cannot be overcome directly, in devising some suitable auxiliary problem when the original one appears insoluble. Could you imagine a more accessible related problem? You should now invent a related problem, not merely remember one; I hope that you have tried already the question: Do you know a related problem? The remaining questions in that paragraph of the list which starts with the title of the present article have a common aim, the VARIATION OF THE PROBLEM. There are different means to attain this aim as GENERALIZATION, SPECIALIZATION, ANALOGY, and others which are variOUS ways of DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBINING. Induction and mathematical induction. Induction is the process of discovering general laws by the observation and combination of particular instances. It is used in all sciences, even in mathematics. Mathematical induction is used in mathematics alone to prove theorems of a certain kind. It is rather unfortunate that the names are connected because there is very little logical connection between the two processes. There is, however, some prac tical connection; we often use both methods together. We are going to illustrate both methods by the same example. 1. We may observe, by chance, that 1 + 8 + 27 + 64 = 100 Induction and Mathematical Induction 115 and, recognizing the cubes and the square, we may give to the fact we observed the more interesting form: 13 + 23 + 33 + 43 = 102. How does such a thing happen? Does it often happen that such a sum of successive cubes is a square? In asking this we are like the naturalist who, impressed by a curious plant or a curious geological formation, con ceives a general question. Our general question is con cerned with the sum of successive cubes I3+23 +33+···+n3. We were led to it by the "particular instance" n = 4· 'What can we do for our question? What the naturalist would do; we can investigate other special cases. The special cases n = 2, 3 are still simpler, the case n = 5 is the next one. Let us add, for the sake of uniformity and completeness, the case n = 1. Arranging neatly all these cases, as a geologist would arrange his specimens of a certain ore, we obtain the following table: 1 = 12 1 9 = 32 I+ 8 I + 8 + 27 36 = 62 1 + 8 + 27 + 64 = 100 = 102 1 + 8 + 2 7 + 64 + 12 5 = 2 2 5 = I5 2. It is hard to believe that all these sums of consecutive cubes are squares by mere chance. In a similar case, the naturalist would have little doubt that the general law suggested by the special cases heretofore observed is cor rect; the general law is almost proved by induction. The mathematician expresses himself with more reserve al though fundamentally, of course, he thinks in the same fashion. He would say that the following theorem IS strongly suggested by induction: The sum of the first n cubes is a square. u6 Induction and Mathematical Induction 2. We have been led to conjecture a remarkable, some what mysterious law. Why should those sums of succes sive cubes be squares? But, apparently, they are squares. What would the naturalist do in such a situation? He would go on examining his conjecture. In so doing, he may follow various lines of investigation. The naturalist may accumulate further experimental evidence; if we wish to do the same, we have to test the next cases, n = 6, 7, . . . . The naturalist may also reexamine the facts whose observation has led him to his conjecture; he compares them carefully, he tries to disentangle some deeper regularity, some further analogy. Let us follow this line of investigation. Let us reexamine the cases n =I, 2, 3, 4, 5 which we arranged in our table. Why are all these sums squares? What can we say about these squares? Their bases are I, 3, 6, 10, I5· What about these bases? Is there some deeper regularity, some further analogy? At any rate, they do not seem to increase too irregularly. How do they increase? The difference between two successive terms of this se quence is itself increasing, 3- I = 2, 6- 3 = 3, 10 - 6 = 4, I5- 10 = 5· Now these differences are conspicuously regular. \Ve may see here a surprising analogy between the bases of those squares, we may see a remarkable regularity in the num bers 1, 3, 6, 10, 15: I = I 3 =I+ 2 6 =I+ 2 + 3 IO = 1+ 2 + 3 + 4 15 = 1+ 2 + 3 + 4 + 5· If this regularity is general (and the contrary is hard to Induction and Mathematical Induction II7 believe) the theorem we suspected takes a more precise form: It is, for n = 1, 2, 3, ... 3· The law we just stated was found by induction, and the manner in which it was found conveys to us an idea about induction which is necessarily one-sided and im perfect but not distorted. Induction tries to find regular ity and coherence behind the observations. Its most con spicuous instruments are generalization, specialization, analogy. Tentative generalization starts from an effort to understand the observed facts; it is based on analogy, and tested by further special cases. We refrain from further remarks on the subject of induction about which there is wide disagreement among philosophers. But it should be added that many mathe matical results were found by induction first and proved later. Mathematics presented with rigor is a systematic deductive science but mathematics in the making is an experimental inductive science. 4· In mathematics as in the physical sciences we may use observation and induction to discover general laws. But there is a difference. In the physical sciences, there is no higher authority than observation and induction but in mathematics there is such an authority: rigorous proof. After having worked a while experimentally it may be good to change our point of view. Let us be strict. We have discovered an interesting result but the reasoning that led to it was merely plausible, experimental, pro visional, heuristic; let us try to establish it definitively by a rigorous proof. We have arrived now at a "problem to prove": to 118 Induction and Mathematical Induction prove or to disprove the result stated before (see 2, above). There is a minor simplification. We may know that I+2+3+···+n= n(n + I) · 2 At any rate, this is easy to verify. Take a rectangle with sides n and n + 1, and divide it in two halves by a zigzag line as in Fig. 15a which shows the case n = 4· Each of the halves is "staircase-shaped" and its area has the ex pression 1 + 2 + · · · + n; for n = 4 it is 1 + 2 + 3 + 4, see Fig. 18b. Now, the whole area of the rectangle is n(n + 1) of which the staircase-shaped area is one half; this proves the formula. 0 FIG . 18 b vVe may transform the result which we found by m duction into I3 + 23 + 33 + ... + n3 = (n(n; I)y 5· If we have no idea how to prove this result, we may at least test it. Let us test the first case we have not tested yet, the case n = 6. For this value, the formula yields I + 8 + 27 + 64 + 125 + 2I6 = (6 ~ 7y Induction and Mathematical Induction 119 and, on computation, this turns out to be true, both sides being equal to 441. ·we can test the formula more effectively. The formula is, very likely, generally true, true for all values of n. Does it remain true when we pass from any value n to the next value n + 1? Along with the formula as written above (p. 1 18) we should also have Now, there is a simple check. Subtracting from this the formula written above, we obtain (n + 1)3 = ((n + r)2(n + 2)y _ (n(n-:- r)y. This is, however, easy to check. The right hand side may be written as c ~ ry [(n + 2)2 - nZ] = (n ~ ry [n2 + 4n + 4 - nZ] ( n + I) 2 ( 4n + 4) = ( n + I ) 2 ( n + I) = ( n + I) 3. 4 Our experimentally found formula passed a vital test. Let us see clearly what this test means. We verified beyond doubt that (n + I)3 = en+ I)2(n + 2)y- (n(n ;- I)y. We do not know yet whether 3 + 3 + 3 + + 3 - n - · · 3 2 1 (n (n + I) )z 2 is true. But if we knew that this was true we could infer, by adding the equation which we verified beyond doubt, that 3 + 3 + 3 + + 3 + ( + )3 ... ((n + r)(n + 2))2 3 n n = 2 I r 2 120 Induction and Mathematical Induction is also true which is the same assertion for the next integer n + 1. Now, we actually know that our conjec ture is true for n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5· 6. By virtue of what we have just said, the conjecture, being true for n = 6, must also be true for n = 7; being true for n = 7 it is true for n = 8; being true for n = 8 it is true for n = g; and so on. It holds for all n, it is proved to be true generally. 6. The foregoing proof may serve as a pattern in many similar cases. What are the essential lines of this pattern? The assertion we have to prove must be given in ad vance, in precise form. The assertion must depend on an integer n. The assertion must be sufficiently "explicit" so that we have some possibility of testing whether it remains true in the passage from n to the next integer n + 1. If we succeed in testing this effectively, we may be able to use our experience, gained in the process of testing, to conclude that the assertion must be true for n + 1 pro vided it is true for n. When we are so far it is sufficient to know that the assertion is true for n = 1; hence it follows for n =2; hence it follows for n = 3· and so on; passing from any integer to the next, we prove the assertion generally. This process is so often used that it deserves a name. We could call it "proof from n ton+ 1" or still simpler ''passage to the next integer." Unfortunately, the ac cepted technical term is "mathematical induction." This name results from a random circumstance. The precise assertion that we have to prove may come from any source, and it is immaterial from the logical viewpoint what the source is. Now, in many cases, as in the case we discussed here in detail, the source is induction, the asser tion is found experimentally, and so the proof appears as a mathematical complement to induction; this ex plains the name. Inventors Paradox 121 7· Here is another point, somewhat subtle, but impor tant to anybody who desires to find proofs by himself. In the foregoing, we found two different assertions by observation and induction, one after the other, the first under 1, the second under 2; the second was more pre cise than the first. Dealing with the second assertion, we found a possibility of checking the passage from n to n + 1, and so we were able to find a proof by "mathemat ical induction." Dealing with the first assertion, and ignoring the precision added to it by the second one, we should scarcely have been able to find such a proof. In fact, the first assertion is less precise, less "explicit," less "tangible," less accessible to testing and checking than the second one. Passing from the first to the second, from the less precise to the more precise statement, was an important preparative for the final proof. This circumstance has a paradoxical aspect. The second assertion is stronger; it implies immediately the first, whereas the somewhat "hazy" first assertion can hardly imply the more "clear-cut" second one. Thus, the stronger theorem is easier to master than the weaker one; this is the INVENTOR'S PARADOX. Inventor's paradox. The more ambitious plan may have more chances of success. This sounds paradoxical. Yet, when passing from one problem to another, we may often observe that the new, more ambitious problem is easier to handle than the original problem. More questions may be easier to an swer than just one question. The more comprehensive theorem may be easier to prove, the more general prob lem may be easier to solve. The paradox disappears if we look closer at a few examples (GENERALIZATION, 2; INDUCTION AND MATHEMAT ICAL INDUCTION, 7)· The more ambitious plan may have 122 Is It Possible to Satisfy the Condition? more chances of success provided it is not based on mere pretension but on some vision of the things beyond those immediately present. Is it possible to satisfy the condition? Is the condition sufficient to determine the unknown? Or is it insufficient? Or redundant? Or contradictory? These questions are often useful at an early stage when they do not need a final answer but just a provisional answer, a guess. For examples, see sections 8, 18. It is good to foresee any feature of the result for which we work. When we have some idea of what we can ex pect, we know better in which direction we should go. Now, an important feature of a problem is the number of solutions of which it admits. Most interesting among problems are those which admit of just one solution; we are inclined to consider problems with a uniquely deter mined solution as the only "reasonable" problems. Is our problem, in this sense, "reasonable"? If we can answer this question, even by a plausible guess, our interest in the problem increases and we can work better. Is our problem "reasonable"? This question is useful at an early stage of our work if we can answer it easily. If the answer is difficult to obtain, the trouble we have in obtaining it may outweigh the gain in interest. The same is true of the question "Is it possible to satisfy the condition?" and the allied questions of our list. We should put them because the answer might be
