# Auto Chapter 11

easy and plausible, but we should not insist on them when the answer seems to be difficult or obscure. The corresponding questions for "problems to prove" are: Is it likely that the proposition is true? Or is it more likely that it is false? The way the question is put shows clearly that only a guess, a plausible provisional answer, is expected. Look at the Unknown 123 Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646-1716), great mathe matician and philosopher, planned to write an "Art of Invention" but he never carried through his plan. Nu merous fragments dispersed in his works show, how ever, that he entertained interesting ideas about the subject whose importance he often emphasized. Thus, he wrote: "Nothing is more important than to see the sources of invention which are, in my opinion, more interesting than the inventions themselves." Lemma means "auxiliary theorem." The word is of Greek origin; a more literal translation would be "what is assumed." We are trying to prove a theorem, say, A. We are led to suspect another theorem, say, B; if B were true we could perhaps, using it, prove A. We assume B provisionally, postponing its proof, and go ahead with the proof of A. Such a theorem B is assumed, and is an auxiliary theorem to the originally proposed theorem A. Our little story is fairly typical and explains the present meaning of the word "lemma." Look at the unknown. This is old advice; the corre sponding Latin saying is: "respice finem." That is, look at the end. Remember your aim. Do not forget your goal. Think of what you are desiring to obtain. Do not lose sight of what is required. Keep in mind what you are working for. Look at the unknown. Look at the conclu sion. The last two versions of "respice finem" are spe cifically adapted to mathematical problems, to "problems to find" and to "problems to prove" respectively. Focusing our attention on our aim and concentrating our will on our purpose, we think of ways and means to attain it. What are the means to this end? How can you attain your aim? How can you obtain a result of this 124 Look at the Unknown kind? What causes could produce such a result? Where have you seen such a result produced? What do people usually do to obtain such a result? And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar unknown. And try to think of a familiar theorem having the same or a similar conclusion. Again, the last two versions are specifically adapted to "problems to find" and to "prob lems to prove" respectively. 1. We are going to consider mathematical problems, "problems to find," and the suggestion: Try to think of a familiar problem having the same unknown. Let us com pare this suggestion with that involved in the question: Do you know a related problem? The latter suggestion is more general than the former one. If a problem is related to another problem, the two have something in common; they may involve a few com mon objects or notions, or have some data in common, or some part of the condition, and so on. Our first sugges tion insists on a particular common point: The two problems should have the same unknown. That is, the unknown should be in both cases an object of the same category, for instance, in both cases the length of a straight line. In comparison with the general suggestion, there is a certain economy in the special suggestion. First, we may save some effort in representing the prob lem; we must not look at once at the whole problem but just at the unknown. The problem appears to us schemat ically, as "Given .......... find the length of the line." Second, there is a certain economy of choice. Many, many problems may be related to the proposed problem, having some point or other in common with it. But, looking at the unknown, we restrict our choice; we take Look at the Unknown 125 into consideration only such problems as have the same unknown. And, of course, among the problems having the same unknown, we consider first those which are the most elementary and the most familiar to us. 2. The problem before us has the form: "Given .......... find the length of the line." Now the simplest and most familiar problems of this kind are concerned with triangles: Given three constit uent parts of a triangle find the length of a side. Re membering this, we have found something that may be relevant: Here is a problem related to yours and solved before. Could you use it? Could )'OU use its result? In order to use the familiar results about triangles, we must have a triangle in our figure. Is there a triangle? Or should we introduce one in order to profit from those famili ar results? Should you introduce some auxiliary element in order to make their use possible? There are several simple problems whose unknown is the side of a triangle. (They differ from each other in the data; two angles may be given and one side, or two sides and one angle, and the position of the angle with respect to the given sides may be different. Then, all these prob lems are particularly simple for right triangles.) With our attention riveted upon the problem before us, we try to find out which kind of triangle we should introduce, which formerly solved problem (with the same unknown as tha t before us) we could most conveniently adapt to our present purpose. Having introduced a suitable auxiliary triangle, it may happen that we do not know yet three constituent parts of it. This, however, is not absolutely necessary; if we foresee that the missing parts can be obtained somehow we have made essential progress, we have a plan of the solution. 126 Look at the Unknown 3· The procedure sketched in the foregoing (under 1 and 2) is illustrated, essentially, by section 10 (the illus tration is somewhat obscured by the slowness of the students) . It is not difficult at all to add many similar examples. In fact, the solution of almost all "problems to find" usually proposed in less advanced classes can be started by proper use of the suggestion: And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar un known. We must take such problems schematically, and look at the unknown first: ( 1) Given ....... find the length of the line. (2) Given ....... find the angle. (3) Given ....... find the volume of the tetrahedron. (4) Given ....... construct the point. If we have some experience in dealing with elementary mathematical problems, we will readily recall some sim ple and familiar problem or problems having the same unknown. If the problem proposed is not one of those simple familiar problems we naturally try to make use of what is familiar to us and profit from the result of those simple problems. We try to introduce some useful well known thing into the problem, and doing so we may get a good start. In each of the four cases mentioned there is an obvious plan, a plausible guess about the future course of the solution. ( 1) The unknown should be obtained as a side of some triangle. It remains to introduce a suitable triangle with three known, or easily obtainable, constituents. (2) The unknown should be obtained as an angle in some triangle. It remains to introduce a suitable triangle. (3) The unknown can be obtained if the area of the base and the length of the altitude are known. It re- Look at the Unknown mains to find the area of a face and the corresponding altitude. (4) The unknown should be obtained as the intersec tion of two loci each of which is either a circle or a straight line. It remains to disentangle such loci from the proposed condition. In all these cases the plan is suggested by a simple problem with the same unknown and by the desire to use its result or its method. Pursuing such a plan, we may run into difficulties, of course, but we have some idea to start with which is a great advantage. 4· There is no such advantage if there is no formerly solved problem having the same unknown as the pro posed problem. In such cases, it is much more difficult to tackle the proposed problem. "Find the area of the surface of a sphere with given radius." This problem was solved by Archimedes. There is scarcely a simpler problem with the same unknown and there was certainly no such simpler problem of which Archimedes could have made use. In fact, Archimedes' solution may be regarded as one of the most notable mathematical achievements. "Find the area of the surface of the sphere inscribed in a tetrahedron whose six edges are given." If we know Archimedes' result, we need not have Archimedes' genius to solve the problem; it remains to express the radius of the inscribed sphere in terms of the six edges of the tetrahedron. This is not exactly easy but the difficulty cannot be compared with that of Archimedes' problem. To know or not to know a formerly solved problem with the same unknown may make all the difference be tween an easy and a difficult problem. 5· When Archimedes found the area of the surface of the sphere he did not know, as we just mentioned, any formerly solved problem having the same unknown. But Look at the Unknown he knew various formerly solved problems having a simi lar unknown. There are curved surfaces whose area is easier to obtain than that of the sphere and which were well known in Archimedes' time, as the lateral surfaces of right circular cylinders, of right circular cones, and of the frustums of such cones. We may be certain that Archimedes considered carefully these simpler similar cases. In fact, in his solution, he uses as approximation to the sphere a composite solid consisting of two cones and several frustums of cones (see DEFINITION, 6). If we are unable to find a formerly solved problem having the same unknown as the problem before us, we try to find one having a similar unknown. Problems of the latter kind are less closely related to the problem be fore us than problems of the former kind and, therefore, less easy to use for our purpose in general but they may be valuable guides nevertheless. 6. We add a few remarks concerning "problems to prove"; they are analogous to the foregoing more exten sive comments on "problems to find." We have to prove (or disprove) a clearly stated theo rem. Any theorem proved in the past which is in some way related to the theorem before us has a chance to be of some service. Yet we may expect the most immediate service of theorems which have the same conclusion as the one before us. Knowing this, we look at the conclusion, that is, we consider our theorem emphasizing the conclu sion. Our way of looking at the theorem can be expressed in writing by a scheme as: "If .......... then the angles are equal." We focus our attention upon the conclusion before us and try to think of a familiar theorem having the same or a similar conclusion. Especially, we try to think of very simple familiar theorems of this sort. Modern Heuristic 129 In our case, there are various theorems of this kind and we may recollect the following: "If two triangles are con gruent the corresponding angles are equal." Here is a theorem related to yours and proved before. Could you use it? Should you introduce some auxiliary element in order to make its use possible? Following these suggestions, and trying to judge the help afforded by the theorem we recollected, we may con ceive a plan: Let us try to prove the equality of the angles in question from congruent triangles. We see that we must introduce a pair of triangles containing those angles and prove that they are congruent. Such a plan is certainly good to start the work and it may lead eventu ally to the desired end as in section 19. 7. Let us sum up. Recollecting formerly solved prob lems with the same or a similar unknown (formerly proved theorems with the same or a similar conclusion) we have a good chance to start in the right direction and we may conceive a plan of the solution. In ~imple cases, which are the most frequent in less advanced classes, the most elementary problems with the same unknown (the orems with the same conclusion) are usually sufficient. Trying to recollect problems with the same unknown is an obvious and common-sense device (compare what was said in this respect in section 4) . It is rather surprising that such a simple and useful device is not more widely known; the author is inclined to think that it was not even stated before in full generality. In any case, neither students nor teachers of mathematics can afford to ignore the proper use of the suggestion: Look at the unknown! And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar unknown. Modern heuristic endeavors to understand the process of solving problems, especially the mental operations Modern Heuristic typically useful in this process. It has various sources of information none of which should be neglected. A seri ous study of heuristic should take into account both the logical and the psychological background, it should not neglect what such older writers as Pappus, Descartes, Leibnitz, and Bolzano have to say about the subject, but it should least neglect unbiased experience. Experience in solving problems and experience in watching other peo ple solving problems must be the basis on which heuristic is built. In this study, we should not neglect any sort of problem, and should find out common features in the way of handling all sorts of problems; we should aim at general features, independent of the subject matter of the problem. The study of heuristic has "practical" aims; a better understanding of the mental operations typically useful in solving problems could exert some good influ ence on teaching, especially on the teaching of mathe matics. The present book is a first attempt toward the realiza tion of this program. We are going to discuss how the various articles of this Dictionary fit into the program. 1. Our list is, in fact, a list of mental operations typi cally useful in solving problems; the questions and sug gestions listed hint at such operations. Some of these operations are described again in the Second Part, and some of them are more thoroughly discussed and illus trated in the First Part. For additional information about particular questions and suggestions of the list, the reader should refer to those fifteen articles of the Dictionary whose titles are the first sentences of the fifteen paragraphs of the list: WHAT IS THE UNKNOWN? IS IT POSSIBLE TO SATISFY THE CONDITION? DRAW A FIGURE . . . . CAN YOU USE THE RESULT? The reader, wishing information about a particular item of the list, should look at the first words of the para- Modern Heuristic graph in which the item is contained and then look up the article in the Dictionary that has those first words as title. For instance, the suggestion "Go back to defini tions" is contained in the paragraph of the list whose first sentence is: COULD YOU RESTATE THE PROBLEM? Under this title, the reader finds a cross-reference to DEFINITION in which article the suggestion in question is explained and ill us tra ted. 2. The process of solving problems is a complex proc ess that has several different aspects. The twelve principal articles of this Dictionary study certain of these aspects at some length; we are going to mention their titles in what follows. When we are working intensively, we feel keenly the progress of our work; we are elated when our progress is rapid, we are depressed when it is slow. What is essen tial tO PROGRESS AND ACHIEVEMENT in solving problems? The article discussing this question is often quoted in other parts of the Dictionary and should be read fairly early. Trying to solve a problem, we consider different as pects of it in turn, we roll it over and over incessantly in our mind; VARIATION OF THE PROBLEM is essential to our work. We may vary the problem by DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBINING its elements, or by going back to the DEFINI TION of certain of its terms, or we may use the great resources of GENERALIZATION, SPECIALIZATION, and ANAL OGY. Variation of the problem may lead us to AUXILIARY ELEMENTS, or to the discovery of a more accessible AUX ILIARY PROBLEM. We have to distinguish carefully between two kinds of problems, PROBLEMS TO FIND, PROBLEMS TO PROVE. Our list is specially adapted to "problems to find." We have to revise it and change some of its questions and sugges tions in order to apply it also to "problems to prove." Modern Heuristic In all sorts of problems, but especially in mathematical problems which are not too simple, suitable NOTATION and geometrical FIGURES are a great and often indispen sable help. 3· The process of solving problems has many aspects but some of them are not considered at all in this book and others only very briefly. It is justified, I think, to exclude from a first short exposition points which could appear too subtle, or too technical, or too controversial. Provisional, merely plausible HEURISTIC REASONING is important in discovering the solution, but you should not take it for a proof; you must guess, but also EXAMINE YOUR GUESS. The nature of heuristic arguments is dis cussed in siGNS OF PROGREss, but the discussion could go further. The consideration of certain logical patterns is impor tant in our subject but it appeared advisable not to introduce any technical article. There are only two arti cles predominantly devoted to psychological aspects, on DETERMINATION, HOPE, SUCCESS, and on SUBCONSCIENT WORK. There is an incidental remark on animal psy chology; see WORKING BACKWARDS. It is emphasized that all sorts of problems, especially PRACTICAL PROBLEMS, and even PUZZLES, are within the scope of heuristic. It is also emphasized that infallible RULES OF DISCOVERY are beyond the scope of serious re search. Heuristic discusses human behavior in the face of problems; this has been in fashion, presumably, since the beginning of human society, and the quintessence of such ancient discussions seems to be preserved in the WISDOM OF PROVERBS. 4· A few articles on particular questions are included and some articles on more general aspects are expanded, because they could be, or parts of them could be, of special interest to students or teachers. Modern Heuristic 1 33 There are articles discussing methodical questions often important in elementary mathematics, as PAPPUS, WORKING BACKWARDS (already quoted under 3), REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM AND INDIRECT PROOF, INDUCTION AND MATHE MATICAL INDUCTION, SETTING UP EQUATIONS, TEST BY DI MENSION, and WHY PROOFS? A few articles address them selves more particularly to teachers, as ROUTINE PROBLEMS and DIAGNOSIS, and others to students somewhat more ambitious than the average, as THE INTELLIGENT PROBLEM SOLVER, THE INTELLIGENT READER, and THE FUTURE MATHE MATICIAN. It may be mentioned here that the dialogues between the teacher and his students, given in sections 8, 10, 18, 19, 20 and in various articles of the Dictionary may serve as models not only to the teacher who tries to guide his class but also to the problem-solver who works by h im self. T o describe thinking as "mental discourse," as a sort of conversation of the thinker with himself, is not inap propriate. The dialogues in question show the progress of the solution; the problem-solver, talking with himself, may progress along a similar line. 5· We are not going to exhaust the remaining titles; just a few groups will be mentioned. Some articles contain remarks on the history of our subject, on DESCARTES, LEIBNITZ, BOLZANO, on HEURISTIC, on TERMS, OLD AND NEW and on PAPPUS (this }ast one has been quoted already under 4) . A few articles explain technical terms: coNDITION, COROLLARY, L E MMA. Some articles contain only cross-references (they are marked with daggers [t] in the Table of Contents). 6. Heuristic aims at generality, at the study of pro cedures which are independent of the subj ect-matter and apply to all sorts of problems. The present expositiOn, however, quotes almost exclusively elementary mathe- 134 Notation matical problems as examples. It should not be over looked that this is a restriction but it is hoped that this restriction does not impair seriously the trend of our study. In fact, elementary mathematical problems pre sent all the desirable variety, and the study of their solu tion is particularly accessible and interesting. Moreover, nonmathematical problems although seldom quoted as examples are never completely forgotten. More advanced mathematical problems are never directly quoted but constitute the real background of the present exposition. The expert mathematician who has some interest for this sort of study can easily add examples from his own ex perience to elucidate the points illustrated by elementary examples here. 7· The writer of this book wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness and express his gratitude to a few modern authors, not quoted in the article on H E URISTIC. They are the physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach, the mathema tician Jacques Hadamard, the psychologists William James and Wolfgang Kohler. He wishes also to quote the psychologist K. Duncker and the mathematician F. Krauss whose work (published after his own research was fairly advanced, and partly published) shows certain parallel remarks. Notation. If you wish to realize the advantages of a well chosen and well known notation try to add a few not too small numbers with the condition that you are not allowed to use the familiar Arabic numerals, al though you may use, if you wish to write, Roman nu merals. Take, for instance, the numbers MMMXC, MDXCVI, MDCXLVI, MDCCLXXXI, MDCCCLXXXVII. We can scarcely overestimate the importance of mathe matical notation. Modern computers, using the decimal notation, have a great advantage over the ancient com- Notation 1 35 puters who did not have such a convenient manner of writing the numbers. An average modern student who is familiar with the usual notation of algebra, analytical geometry, and the differential and integral calculus, has an immense advantage over a Greek mathematician in solving the problems about areas and volumes which exercised the genius of Archimedes. 1. Speaking and thinking are closely connected, the use of words assists the mind. Certain philosophers and philologists went a little further and asserted that the use of words is indispensable to the use of reason. Yet this last assertion appears somewhat exaggerated. If we have a little experience of serious mathematical work we know that we can do a piece of pretty hard thinking without using any words, just looking at geo metric figures or manipulating algebraic symbols. Figures and symbols are closely connected with mathematical thinking, their use assists the mind. We could improve that somewhat narrow assertion of philosophers and philologists by bringing the words into line with other sorts of signs and saying that the use of signs appears to be indispensable to the use of reason. At any rate, the use of mathematical symbols is similar to the use of words. Mathematical notation appears as a sort of language, une langue bien faite, a language well adapted to its purpose, concise and precise, with rules which, unlike the rules of ordinary grammar, suffer no exception. If we accept this viewpoint, SETTING UP EQUATIONS appears as a sort of translation, translation from ordinary
