# Auto Chapter 12

language into the language of mathematical symbols. 2. Some mathematical symbols, as+,-,=, and several others, have a fixed traditional meaning, but other sym bols, as the small and capital letters of the Roman and Greek alphabets, are used in different meanings in dif- Notation ferent problems. When we face a new problem, we must choose certain symbols, we have to introduce suitable notation. There is something analogous in the use of ordinary language. Many words are used in different meanings in different contexts; when precision is impor tant, we have to choose our words carefully. An important step in solving a problem is to choose the notation. It should be done carefully. The time we spend now on choosing the notation may be well repaid by the time we save later by avoiding hesitation and con fusion. Moreover, choosing the notation carefully, we have to think sharply of the elements of the problem which must be denoted. Thus, choosing a suitable nota tion may contribute essentially to understanding the problem. 3· A good notation should be unambiguous, pregnant, easy to remember; it should avoid harmful second mean ings, and take advantage of useful second meanings; the order and connection of signs should suggest the order and connection of things. 4· Signs must be, first of all, unambiguous. It is inad missible that the same symbol denote two different ob jects in the same inquiry. If, solving a problem, you call a certain magnitude a you should avoid calling anything else a which is connected with the same problem. Of course, you may use the letter a in a different meaning in a different problem. Although it is forbidden to use the same symbol for different objects it is not forbidden to use different sym bols for the same object. Thus, the product of a and b may be written as axb a·b a b. In some cases, it is advantageous to use two or more dif ferent signs for the same object, but such cases require Notation 137 particular care. Usually, it is better to use just one sign for one object, and in no case should several signs be used wantonly. 5· A good sign should be easy to remember and easy to recognize; the sign should immediately remind us of the object and the object of the sign. A simple device to make signs easily recognizable is to use initials as symbols. For example, in section 20 we used r for rate, t for time, V for volume. We cannot use, how ever, initials in all cases. Thus, in section 20, we had to consider a radius but we could not call it r because this letter was already taken to denote a rate. There are still other motives restricting the choice of symbols, and other means to make them easily recognizable which we are going to discuss. 6. Notation is not only easily recognizable but par ticularly helpful in shaping our conception when the order and connection of the signs suggest the order and connection of the objects. We need several examples to illustrate this point. (I) In order to denote objects which are near to each other in the conception of the problem we use letters which are near to each other in the alphabet. Thus, we generally use letters at the beginning of the alphabet as a, b, c, for given quantities or constants, and letters at the end of the alphabet as x, y, z, for unknown quantities or variables. In section 8 we used a, b, c for the given length, width, and height of a parallelepiped. On this occasion, the nota tion a, b, c was preferable to the notation by initials l, w, h. The three lengths played the same role in the problem which is emphasized by the use of successive letters. Moreover, being at the beginning of the alphabet, a, b, c are, as we just said, the most usual letters to denote given quantities. On some other occasion, if the three lengths Notation play different roles and it is important to know which lengths are horizontal and which one is vertical, the notation l, w, h might be preferable. (II) In order to denote objects belonging to the same category, we frequently choose letters belonging to the same alphabet for one category, using different alphabets for different categories. Thus, in plane geometry we often use: Roman capitals as A, B, C, ... for points, small Roman letters as a, b, c, . .. for lines, small Greek letters as ex, (3, y, ... for angles. If there are two objects belonging to different cate gories but having some particular relation to each other which is important for our problem, we may choose, to denote these two objects, corresponding letters of the respective alphabets as A and a, B and b, and so on. A familiar example is the usual notation for a triangle: A, B, C stand for the vertices, a, b, c for the sides, ex, (3, y for the angles. It is understood that a is the side opposite to the vertex A and the angle at A is called ex. (III) In section 20, the letters a, b, x, y are particu larly well chosen to indicate the nature and connection of the elements denoted. The letters a, b hint that the magnitudes denoted are constants; x, y indicate variables; a precedes b as x precedes y and this suggests that a is in the same relation to b as x is to y. In fact, a and x are horizontal, b andy vertical, and a : b = x : y. 7. The notation b. ABC,.__ b. EFG indicates that the two triangles in question are similar. In modern books, the formula is meant to indicate that Notation 139 the two triangles are similar, the vertices corresponding to each other in the order as they are written, A to E, B to F, C to G. In older books, this proviso about the order was not yet introduced; the reader had to look at the figure or remember the derivation in order to ascertain which vertex corresponded to which. The modern notation is much preferable to the older one. Using the modern notation, we may draw conse quences from the formula without looking at the figure. Thus, we may derive that LA= LE AB : BC = EF : FG and other relations of the same kind. The older notation expresses less and does not allow such definite conse quences. A notation expressing more than another may be termed more pregnant. The modern notation for simili tude of triangles is more pregnant than the older one, reflects the order and connection of things more fully than the older one, and therefore, it may serve as basis for more consequences than the older one. 8. Words have second meanings. Certain contexts in which a word is often used influence it and add some thing to its primary meaning, some shade, or second meaning, or "connotation." If we write carefully, we try to choose among the words having almost the same mean ing the one whose second meaning is best adapted. There is something similar in mathematical notation. Even mathematical symbols may acquire a sort of second meaning from contexts in which they are often used. If we choose our notation carefully, we have to take this circumstance into account. Let us illustrate the point. There are certain letters which have acquired a firmly rooted, traditional meaning. Thus, e stands usually for 140 Notation the basis of natural logarithms, i for v -1 , the imaginary unit, and 7T' for the ratio of the circumferer.ce of the circle to the diameter. It is on the whole better to use such symbols only in their traditional meaning. If we use such a symbol in some other meaning its traditional meaning could occasionally interfere and be embarrass ing, even misleading. It is true that harmful second meanings of this sort give less trouble to the beginner who has not yet studied many subjects than to the mathe matician who should have sufficient experience to deal with such nuisances. Second meanings of the symbols can also be helpful, even very helpful, if they are used with tact. A notation used on former occasions may assist us in recalling some useful procedure; of course, we should be sufficiently careful to separate clearly the present (primary) mean ing of the symbol from its former (secondary) mean ing. A standing notation [as the traditional notation for the parts of the triangle which we mentioned before, 6 (II) ] has great advantages; used on several former occasions it may assist us in recalling various formerly used procedures. We remember our formulas in some standing notation. Of course, we should be sufficiently careful when, owing to particular circumstances, we are obliged to use a standing notation in a meaning some what different from the usual one. g. When we have to choose between two notations, one reason may speak for one, and some other reason for the other. We need experience and taste to choose the more suitable notation as we need experience and taste to choose more suitable words. Yet it is good to know the various advantages and disadvantages discussed in the foregoing. At any rate, we should choose our notation carefully, and have some good reason for our choice. 10. Not only the most hopeless boys in the class but Pappus also quite intelligent students may have an aversion for algebra. There is always something arbitrary and artifi cial about notation; to learn a new notation is a burden for the memory. The intelligent student refuses to as sume the burden if he does not see any compensation for it. The intelligent student is justified in his aversion for algebra if he is not given ample opportunity to convince himself by his own experience that the language of mathematical symbols assists the mind. To help him to such experience is an important task of the teacher, one of his most important tasks. I say that it is an important task but I do not say that it is an easy one. The foregoing remarks may be of some help. See also SETTING uP EQUATIONS. Checking a formula by extensive discussion of its properties may be recom mended as a particularly instructive exercise; see section 14 and CAN YOU CHECK THE RESULT? 2. Pappus, an important Greek mathematician, lived probably around A.D. 300. In the seventh book of his Collectiones, Pappus reports about a branch of study which he calls analyomenos. We can render this name in English as "Treasury of Analysis," or as "Art of Solving Problems," or even as "Heuristic"; the last term seems to be preferable here. A good English translation of Pappus's report is easily accessible7; what follows is a free rendering of the original text: "The so-called Heuristic is, to put it shortly, a special body of doctrine for the use of those who, after having studied the ordinary Elements, are desirous of acquiring the ability to solve mathematical problems, and it is use ful for this alone. It is the work of three men, Euclid, the author of the Elements, Apollonius of Perga, and 7 T. L. Heath , The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements, Cam bridge, 1908, vol. 1, p. 138. 142 Pappus Aristaeus the elder. It teaches the procedures of analysis and synthesis. "In analysis, we start from what is required, we take it for granted, and we draw consequences from it, and con sequences from the consequences, till we reach a point that we can use as starting point in synthesis. For in analysis we assume what is required to be done as already done (what is sought as already found, what we have to prove as true) . We inquire from what antecedent the desired result could be derived; then we inquire again what could be the antecedent of that antecedent, and so on, until passing from antecedent to antecedent, we come eventually upon something already known or admittedly true. This procedure we call analysis, or solution back wards, or regressive reasoning. "But in synthesis, reversing the process, we start from the point which we reached last of all in the analysis, from the thing already known or admittedly true. We derive from it what preceded it in the analysis, and go on making derivations until, retracing our steps, we finally succeed in arriving at what is required. This pnr cedure we call synthesis, or constructive solution, or progressive reasoning. "Now analysis is of two kinds; the one is the analysis of the 'problems to prove' and aims at establishing true theorems; the other is the analysis of the 'problems to find' and aims at finding the unknown. "If we have a 'problem to prove' we are required to prove or disprove a clearly stated theorem A. We do not know yet whether A is true or false; but we derive from A another theorem B, from B another C, and so on, until we come upon a last theorem L about which we have definite knowledge. If L is true, A will be also true, pro vided that all our derivations are convertible. From L we prove the theorem K which preceded Lin the analysis Pappus 143 and, proceding in the same way, we retrace our steps; from C we prove B, from B we prove A, and so we attain our aim. If, however, L is false, we have proved A false. "If we have a 'problem to find' we are required to find a certain unknown x satisfying a clearly stated condition. We do not know yet whether a thing satisfying such a condition is possible or not; but assuming that there is an x satisfying the condition imposed we derive from it another unknown y which has to satisfy a related con dition; then we link y to still another unknown, and so on, until we come upon a last unknown z which we can find by some known method. If there is actually a z satisfying the condition imposed upon it, there will be also an x satisfying the original condition, provided that all our derivations are convertible. We first find z; then, knowing z, we find the unknown that preceded z in the analysis; proceeding in the same way, we retrace our steps, and finally, knowing y, we obtain x, and so we attain our aim. If, however, there is nothing that would satisfy the condition imposed upon z, the problem con cerning x has no solution." We should not forget that the foregoing is not a literal translation but a free rendering, a paraphrase. Various differences between the original and the paraphrase de serve comment, for Pappus's text is important in many ways. 1. Our paraphrase uses a more definite terminology than the original and introduces the symbols A, B, . .. L, x, y, ... z which the original has not. 2. The paraphrase has (p. 141, line 30) "mathematical problems" where the original means "geometrical prob lems." This emphasizes that the procedures described by Pappus are by no means restricted to geometric prob lems; they are, in fact, not even restricted to mathemati cal problems. We have to illustrate this by examples 144 Pappus since, in these matters, generality and independence from the nature of the subject are important (see section 3). 3· Algebraic illustration. Find x satisfying the equation 8(43) + 4-a;) - 54(23) + 2-a;) + 101 = o. This is a "problem to find," not too easy for a beginner. He has to be familiar with the idea of analysis; not with the word "analysis" of course, but with the idea of at taining the aim by repeated reduction. Moreover, he has to be familiar with the simplest sorts of equations. Even with some knowledge, it takes a good idea, a little luck, a little invention to observe that, since 4m = (2m)2 and 4-m = (2m)-2, it may be advantageous to introduce Y =2m. Now, this substitution is really advantageous, the equa tion obtained for y 8 02 + ;2) - 54 (J + ~) + I 0 I = 0 appears simpler than the original equation; but our task is not yet finished. It needs another little invention, an other substitution I z=y+- y which transforms the condition into 8z2 - 54z + 8 5 = o. Here the analysis ends, provided that the problem-solver is acquainted with the solution of quadratic equations. What is the synthesis? Carrying through, step by step, the calculations whose possibility was foreseen by the analysis. The problem-solver needs no new idea to finish his problem, only some patience and attention in calcu lating the various unknowns. The order of calculation is Pappus 145 opposite to the order of invention; first z is found (z = 5/2, 17/4), then y (y = 2, 1/2, 4, 1/4), and finally the originally required x (x = 1, -1, 2, - 2). The syn thesis retraces the steps of the analysis, and it is easy to see in the present case why it does so. 4· Nonmathematical illustration. A primitive man wishes to cross a creek; but he cannot do so in the usual way because the water has risen overnight. Thus, the crossing becomes the object of a problem; "crossing the creek" is the x of this primitive problem. The man may recall that he has crossed some other creek by walking along a fallen tree. He looks around for a suitable fallen tree which becomes his new unknown, his y. He cannot find any suitable tree but there are plenty of trees stand ing along the creek; he wishes that one of them would fall. Could he make a tree fall across the creek? There is a great idea and there is a new unknown; by what means could he tilt the tree over the creek? This train of ideas ought to be called analysis if we accept the terminology of Pappus. If the primitive man succeeds in finishing his analysis he may become the in ventor of the bridge and of the axe. What will be the synthesis? Translation of ideas into actions. The finish ing act of the synthesis is walking along a tree across the creek. The same objects fill the analysis and the synthesis; they exercise the mind of the man in the analysis and his muscles in the synthesis; the analysis consists in thoughts, the synthesis in acts. There is another difference; the order is reversed. Walking across the creek is the first desire from which the analysis starts and it is the last act with which the synthesis ends. 5· The paraphrase hints a little more distinctly than the original the natural connection between analysis and synthesis. This connection is manifest after the foregoing Pappus examples. Analysis comes naturally first, synthesis after wards; analysis is invention, synthesis, execution; analy sis is devising a plan, synthesis carrying through the plan. 6. The paraphrase preserves and even emphasizes cer tain curious phrases of the original: "assume what is required to be done as already done, what is sought as found, what you have to prove as true." This is paradoxi cal; is it not mere self-deception to assume that the problem that we have to solve is solved? This is obscure; what does it mean? If we consider closely the context and try honestly to understand our own experience in solving problems, the meaning can scarcely be doubtful. Let us first consider a "problem to find." Let us call the unknown x and the data a, b, c. To "assume the problem as solved" means to assume that there exists an object x satisfying the condition-that is, having those relations to the data a, b, c which the condition prescribes. This assumption is made just in order to start the analysis, it is provisional, and it is harmless. For, if there is no such object and the analysis leads us anywhere, it is bound to lead us to a final problem that has no solution and hence it will be manifest that our original problem has no solution. Then, the assumption is useful. In order to examine the condition, we have to conceive, to represent to ourselves, or to visualize geometrically the relations which the condition prescribes between x and a, b, c; how could we do so without conceiving, representing, or visualizing x as existent? Finally, the assumption is nat ural. The primitive man whose thoughts and deeds we discussed in comment 4 imagines himself walking on a fallen tree and crossing the creek long before he actually can do so; he sees his problem "as solved." The object of a "problem to prove" is to prove a cer tain theorem A. The advice to "assume A as true" is just an invitation to draw consequences from the theorem A Pappus 147 although we have not yet proved it. People with a certain mental character or a certain philosophy may shrink from drawing consequences from an unproved theorem; but such people cannot start an analysis. Compare FIGURES, 2. 7· The paraphrase uses twice the important phrase "provided that all our derivations are convertible"; see p. 142, line 33 and p. 143, lines 14-15. This is an inter polation; the original contains nothing of the sort and the lack of such a proviso was observed and criticized in modern times. See AUXILIARY PROBLEM, 6 for the notion of "convertible reduction." 8. The "analysis of the problems to prove" is explained in the paraphrase in words quite different from those used by the original but there is no change in the sense; at any rate, there is no intention to change the sense. The analysis of the "problem to find," however, is ex plained more concretely in the paraphrase than in the original. The original seems to aim at the description of a somewhat more general procedure, the construction of a chain of equivalent auxiliary problems which is de scribed in AUXILIARY PROBLEM, 7· g. Many elementary textbooks of geometry contain a few remarks about analysis, synthesis, and "assuming the problem as solved." There is little doubt that this almost ineradicable tradition goes back to Pappus, although there is hardly a current textbook whose writer would show any direct acquaintance with Pappus. The subject is important enough to be mentioned in elementary text books but easily misunderstood. The circumstance alone that it is restricted to textbooks of geometry shows a cur rent lack of understanding; see comment 2 above. If the foregoing comments could contribute to a better under standing of this matter their length would be amply justified. q8 Pedantry and Mastery For another example, a different viewpoint, and further comments see WORKING BACKWARDS. Compare also REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM AND INDIRECT PROOF, 2. Pedantry and mastery are opposite attitudes toward rules. 1. To apply a rule to the letter, rigidly, unquestion ingly, in cases where it fits and in cases where it does not fit, is pedantry. Some pedants are poor fools; they never did understand the rule which they apply so conscien tiously and so indiscriminately. Some pedants are quite successful; they understood their rule, at least in the beginning (before they became pedants), and chose a good one that fits in many cases and fails only occasion ally. To apply a rule with natural ease, with judgment, noticing the cases where it fits, and without ever letting the words of the t·ule obscure the purpose of the action or the opportunities of the situation, is mastery. 2. The questions and suggestions of our list may be helpful both to problem·solvers and to teachers. But, first, they must be understood, their proper use must be learned, and learned by trial and error, by failure and success, by experience in
