# Auto Chapter 13

applying them. Second, their use should never become pedantic. You should ask no question, make no suggestion, indiscriminately, follow ing some rigid habit. Be prepared for various questions and suggestions and use your judgment. You are doing a hard and exciting problem; the step you are going to try next should be prompted by an attentive and open minded consideration of the problem before you. You wish to help a student; what you say to your student should proceed from a sympathetic understanding of his difficulties. Practical Problems 149 And if you are inclined to be a pedant and must rely upon some rule learn this one: Always use your own brains first. Practical problems are different in various respects from purely mathematical problems, yet the principal motives and procedures of the solution are essentially the same. Practical engineering problems usually involve mathematical problems. We will say a few words about the differences, analogies, and connections between these two sorts of problems. 1. An impressive practical problem is the construction of a dam across a river. We need no special knowledge to understand this problem. In almost prehistoric times, long before our modern age of scientific theories, men built dams of some sort in the valley of the Nile, and in other parts of the world, where the crops depended on irrigation. Let us visualize the problem of constructing an impor tant modern dam. What is the unknown? Many unknowns are involved in a problem of this kind: the exact location of the dam, its geometric shape and dimensions, the materials used in its construction, and so on. What is the condition? We cannot answer this question in one short sentence because there are many conditions. In so large a project it is necessary to satisfy many im portant economic needs and to hurt other needs as little as possible. The dam should provide electric power, sup ply water for irrigation or the use of certain communities, and also help to control floods. On the other hand, it should disturb as little as possible navigation, or eco nomically important fish-life, or beautiful scenery; and so forth. And, of course, it should cost as little as possible and be constructed as quickly as possible. Practical Problems What are the data? The multitude of desirable data is tremendous. We need topographical data concerning the vicinity of the river and its tributaries; geological data important for the solidity of foundations, possible leak age, and available materials of construction; meteorologi cal data about annual precipitation and the height of floods; economic data concerning the value of ground which will be flooded, cost of materials and labor; and soon. Our example shows that unknowns, data, and condi tions are more complex and less sharply defined in a practical problem than in a mathematical problem. 2. In order to solve a problem, we need a certain amount of previously acquired knowledge. The modern engineer has a highly specialized body of knowledge at his disposal, a scientific theory of the strength of mate rials, his own experience, and the mass of engineering experience stored in special technical literature. We can not avail ourselves of such special knowledge here but we may try to imagine what was in the mind of an ancient Egyptian dam-builder. He has seen, of course, various other, perhaps smaller, dams: banks of earth or masonry holding back the water. He has seen the flood, laden with all sorts of debris, pressing against the bank. He might have helped to re pair the cracks and the erosion left by the flood. He might have seen a dam break, giving way under the impact of the flood. He has certainly heard stories about dams withstanding the test of centuries or causing catas trophe by an unexpected break. His mind may have pictured the pressure of the river against the surface of the dam and the strain and stress in its interior. Yet the Egyptian dam-builder had no precise, quanti tative, scientific concepts of fluid pressure or of strain and stress in a solid body. Such concepts form an essential Practical Problems part of the intellectual equipment of a modern engineer. Yet the latter also uses much knowledge which has not yet quite reached a precise, scientific level; what he knows about erosion by flowing water, the transportation of silt, the plasticity and other not quite clearly circum scribed properties of certain materials, is knowledge of a rather empirical character. Our example shows that the knowledge needed and the concepts used are more complex and less sharply defined in practical problems than in mathematical problems. 3· Unknowns, data, conditions, concepts, necessary preliminary knowledge, everything is more complex and less sharp in practical problems than in purely mathe matical problems. This is an important difference, per haps the main difference, and it certainly implies further differences; yet the fundamental motives and procedures of the solution appear to be the same for both sorts of problems. There is a widespread opinion that practical problems need more experience than mathematical problems. This may be so. Yet, very likely, the difference lies in the nature of the knowledge needed and not in our attitude toward the problem. In solving a problem of one or the other kind, we have to rely on our experience with simi lar problems and we often ask the questions: Have you seen the same problem in a slightly different form? Do you know a related problem? In solving a mathematical problem, we start from very clear concepts which are fairly well ordered in our mind. In solving a practical problem, we are often obliged to start from rather hazy ideas; then, the clarification of the concepts may become an important part of the problem. Thus, medical science is in a better position to check infectious diseases today than it was in the times before Pasteur when the notion of infection itself was rather Practical Problems hazy. Have you taken into account all essential notions involved in the problem? This is a good question for all sorts of problems but its use varies widely with the nature of the intervening notions. In a perfectly stated mathematical problem all data and all clauses of the condition are essential and must be taken into account. In practical problems we have a mul titude of data and conditions; we take into account as many as we can but we are obliged to neglect some. Take the case of the designer of a large dam. He considers the public interest and important economic interests but he is bound to disregard certain petty claims and grievances. The data of his problem are, strictly speaking, inex haustible. For instance, he would like to know a little more about the geologic nature of the ground on which the foundations must be laid, but eventually he must stop collecting geologic data although a certain margin of uncertainty unavoidably remains. Did you use all the data? Did you use the whole con dition? We cannot miss these questions when we deal with purely mathematical problems. In practical prob lems, however, we should put these questions in a modi fied form: Did you use all the data which could con tribute appreciably to the solution? Did you use all the conditions which could influence appreciably the solu tion? We take stock of the available relevant informa tion, we collect more information if necessary, but eventually we must stop collecting, we must draw the line somewhere, we cannot help neglecting something. "If you will sail without danger, you must never put to sea." Quite often, there is a great surplus of data which have no appreciable influence on the final form of the solution. 4· The designers of the ancient Egyptian d ams had to rely on the common-sense interpretation of their experi- Practical Problems 153 ence, they had nothing else to rely on. The modern engineer cannot rely on common sense alone, especially if his project is of a new and daring design; he has to cal culate the resistance of the projected dam, foresee quan titatively the strain and stress in its interior. For this purpose, he has to apply the theory of elasticity (which applies fairly well to constructions in concrete). To apply this theory, he needs a good deal of mathematics; the practical engineering problem leads to a mathemati cal problem. This mathematical problem is too technical to be dis cussed here; all we can say about it is a general remark. In setting up and in solving mathematical problems de rived £row practical problems, we usually content our selves with an approximation. We are bound to neglect some minor data and conditions of the practical prob lem. Therefore it is reasonable to allow some slight inaccuracy in the computations especially when we can gain in simplicity what we lose in accuracy. 5· Much could be said about approximations that would deserve general interest. We cannot suppose, how ever, any specialized mathematical knowledge and there fore we restrict ourselves to just one intuitive and instructive example. The drawing of geographic maps is an important prac tical problem. Devising a map, we often assume that the earth is a sphere. Now this is only an approximate as sumption and not the exact truth. The surface of the earth is not at all a mathematically defined surface and we definitely know that the earth is flattened at the poles. Assuming, however, that the earth is a sphere, we may draw a map of it much more easily. We gain much in simplicity and do not lose a great deal in accuracy. In fact, let us imagine a big ball that has exactly the shape of the earth and that has a diameter of 25 feet at its 154 Problems to Find, Pmblems to Prove equator. The distance between the poles of such a ball is less than 25 feet because the earth is flattened, but only about one inch less. Thus the sphere yields a good prac tical approximation. Problems to find, problems to prove. We draw a paral lel between these two kinds of problems. 1. The aim of a "problem to find" is to find a certain object, the unknown of the problem. The unknown is also called "quaesitum," or the thing sought, or the thing required. "Problems to find" may be theoretical or practical, abstract or concrete, serious prob lems or mere puzzles. We may seek all sorts of unknowns; we may try to find, to obtain, to acquire, to produce, or to construct all imaginable kinds of objects. In the prob lem of the mystery story the unknown is a murderer. In a chess problem the unknown is a move of the chessmen. In certain riddles the unknown is a word. In certain ele mentary problems of algebra the unknown is a number. In a problem of geometric construction the unknown is a figure. 2. The aim of a "problem to prove" is to show con clusively that a certain clearly stated assertion is true, or else to show that it is false. We have to answer the ques tion: Is this assertion true or false? And we have to answer conclusively, either by proving the assertion true, or by proving it false. A witness affirms that the defendant stayed at home a certain night. The judge has to find out whether this assertion is true or not and, moreover, he has to give as good grounds as possible for his finding. Thus, the judge has a "problem to prove." Another "problem to prove" is to "prove the theorem of Pythagoras." We do not say: "Prove or disprove the theorem of Pythagoras." It would be better in some respects to include in the statement of Problems to Find, Problems to Prove 155 the problem the possibility o£ disproving, but we may neglect it, because we know that the chances for disprov ing the theorem of Pythagoras are rather slight. 3· The principal parts of a "problem to find" are the unknown, the data, and the condition. If we have to construct a triangle with sides a, b, c, the unknown is a triangle, the data are the three lengths a, b, c, and the triangle is required to satisfy the condition that its sides have the given lengths a, b, c. If we have to construct a triangle whose altitudes are a, b, c, the un known is an object of the same category as before, the data are the same, but the condition linking the unknown to the data is different. 4· If a "problem to prove" is a mathematical problem of the usual kind, its principal parts are the hypothesis anct the conclusion of the theorem which has to be proved or disproved. "If the four sides of a quadrilateral are equal, then the two diagonals are perpendicular to each other." The second part starting with "then" is the conclusion, the first part starting with "if" is the hypothesis. [Not all mathematical theorems can be split naturally into hypothesis and conclusion. Thus, it is scarcely pos sible to split so the theorem: "There are an infinity of prime numbers."] 5· If you wish to solve a "problem to find" you must know, and know very exactly, its principal parts, the unknown, the data, and the condition. Our list contains many questions and suggestions concerned with these parts. What is the unknown? What are the data? What is the condition? Separate the various parts of the condition. Find the connection between the data and the un k1.own. 156 Problems to Find, Problems to Prove Look at the unknown! And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar unknown. Keep only a part of the condition, drop the other part; how far is the unknown then determined, how can it vary? Could you derive something useful from the data? Could you think of other data appropriate to determine the unknown? Could you change the unknown, or the data, or both if necessary, so that the new unknown and the new data are nearer to each other? Did you use all the data? Did you use the whole con dition? 6. If you wish to solve a "problem to prove" you must know, and know very exactly, its principal parts, the hypothesis, and the conclusion. There are useful ques tions and suggestions concerning these parts which cor respond to those questions and suggestions of our list which are specially adapted to "problems to find." What is the hypothesis? What is the conclusion? Separate the various parts of the hypothesis. Find the connection between the hypothesis and the conclusion. Look at the conclusion! And try to think of a familiar theorem having the same or a similar conclusion. Keep only a part of the hypothesis, drop the other part; is the conclusion still valid? Could you derive some thing useful from the hypothesis? Could you think of another hypothesis from which you could easily derive the conclusion? Could you change the hypothesis, or the conclusion, or both if necessary, so that the new hypoth esis and the new conclusion are nearer to each other? Did you use the whole hypothesis? 7· "Problems to find" are more important in elemen tary mathematics, "problems to prove" more important in advanced mathematics. In the present book, "prob lems to find" are more emphasized than the other kind, Progress and Achievement 157 but the author hopes to reestablish the balance in a fuller treatment of the subject. Progress and achievement. Have you made any prog ress? What was the essential achievement? We may ad dress questions of this kind to ourselves when we are solving a problem or to a student whose work we super vise. Thus, we are used to judge, more or less confidently, progress and achievement in concrete cases. The step from such concrete cases to a general description is not easy at all. Yet we have to undertake this step if we wish to make our study of heuristic somewhat complete and we must try to clarify what constitutes, in general, prog ress and achievement in solving problems. 1. In order to solve a problem, we must have some knowledge of the subject-matter and we must select and collect the relevant items of our existing but initially dormant knowledge. There is much more in our con ception of the problem at the end than was in it at the outset; what has been added? What we have succeeded in extracting from our memory. In order to obtain the solution we have to recall various essential facts. We have to recollect formerly solved problems, known theorems, definitions, if our problem is mathematical. Extracting such relevant elements from our memory may be termed mobilization. 2. In order to solve a problem, however, it is not enough to recollect isolated facts, we must combine these facts, and their combination must be well adapted to the problem at hand. Thus, in solving a mathematical prob lem, we have to construct an argument connecting the materials recollected to a well adapted whole. This adapting and combining activity may be termed organ ization. 3· In fact, mobilization and organization can never be Progress and Achievement really separated. Working at the problem with concentra tion, we recall only facts which are more or less con nected with our purpose, and we have nothing to connect and organize but materials we have recollected and mobilized. Mobilization and organization are but two aspects of the same complex process which has still many other aspects. 4· Another aspect of the progress of our work is that our mode of conception changes. Enriched with all the materials which we have recalled, adapted to it, and worked into it, our conception of the problem is much fuller at the end than it was at the outset. Desiring to proceed from our initial conception of the problem to a more adequate, better adapted conception, we try various standpoints and view the problem from different sides. We could make hardly any progress without VARIATION OF THE PROBLEM. 5· As we progress toward our final goal we see more and more of it, and when we see it better we judge that we are nearer to it. As our examination of the problem ad vances, we foresee more and more clearly what should be done for the solution and how it should be done. Solving a mathematical problem we may foresee, if we are lucky, that a certain known theorem might be used, that the consideration of a certain formerly solved problem might be helpful, that going back to the meaning of a certain technical term might be necessary. We do not foresee such things with certainty, only with a certain degree of plausibility. We shall attain complete certainty when we have obtained the complete solution, but before obtain ing certainty we must often be satisfied with a more or less plausible guess. Without considerations which are only plausible and provisional, we could never find the solution which is certain and final. We need HEURISTIC REASONING. Progress and Achievement 159 6. What is progress toward the solution? Advancing mobilization and organization of our knowledge, evolu tion of our conception of the problem, increasing pre vision of the steps which will constitute the final argument. We may advance steadily, by small imper ceptible steps, but now and then we advance abruptly, by leaps and bounds. A sudden advance toward the solu tion is called a BRIGHT IDEA, a good idea, a happy thought, a brain-wave (in German there is a more tech nical term, Einfall). What is a bright idea? An abrupt and momentous change of our outlook, a sudden reor ganization of our mode of conceiving the problem, a just emerging confident prevision of the steps we have to take in order to attain the solution. 7· The foregoing considerations provide the questions and suggestions of our list with the right sort of back ground. Many of these questions and suggestions aim directly at the mobilization of our formerly acquired knowledge: Have you seen it before? Or have you seen the same prob lem in a slightly different form? Do you know a related problem? Do you know a theorem that could be useful? Look at the unknown! And try to think of a familiar problem having the same or a similar unknown. There are typical situations in which we think that we have collected the right sort of material and we work for a better organization of what we have mobilized: Here is a problem related to yours and solved before. Could you use it? Could you use its result? Could you use its method? Should you introduce some auxiliary element in order to make its use possible? There are other typical situations in which we think that we have not yet collected enough material. We wonder what is missing: Did you use all the data? Did you use the whole condition? Have you taken into ac count all essential notions involved in the problem? 160 Puzzles Some questions aim directly at the variation of the problem: Could you restate the problem? Could you restate it still differently? Many questions aim at the variation of the problem by specified means, as going back to the DEFINITION, using ANALOGY, GENERALIZATION, SPECIALIZATION, DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBINING. Still other questions suggest a trial to foresee the na ture of the solution we are striving to obtain: Is it pos sible to satisfy the condition? Is the condition sufficient to determine the unknown? Or is it insufficient? Or re dundant? Or contradictory? The questions and suggestions of our list do not men tion directly the bright idea; but, in fact, all are con cerned with it. Understanding the problem we prepare for it, devising a plan we try to provoke it, having pro voked it we carry it through, looking back at the course and the result of the solution we try to exploit it better.s Puzzles. According to section 3, the questions and sug gestions of our list are independent of the subject-matter and applicable to all kinds of problems. It is quite inter esting to test this assertion on various puzzles. Take, for instance, the words DRY OXTAIL IN REAR. The problem is to find an "anagram," that is, a rear rangement of the letters contained in the given words into one word. It is interesting to observe that, when we are solving this puzzle, several questions of our list are pertinent and even stimulating. What is the unknown? A word. What are the data? The four words DRY OXTAIL IN REAR. 8 Several points discussed in this article are more fully considered in the author's paper, Acta Psychologica, vol. 4 (1938) , pp. 113-170. Puzzles 161 What is the condition? The desired word has fifteen letters, the letters contained in the four given words. It is probably a not too unusual English word. Draw a figure. It is quite useful to mark out fifteen blank spaces: Could you restate the problem? We have to find a word containing, in some arrangement, the letters AAEIIOY DLNRRRTX. This is certainly an equivalent restatement of the prob lem (see AUXILIARY PROBLEM, 6) . It may be an advan tageous restatement. Separating the vowels from the consonants (this is important, the alphabetical order is not) we see another aspec[ of the problem. Thus, we see now that the desired word has seven syllables unless it has some diphthongs. If you cannot solve the proposed problem, try to solve first some related problem. A related problem is to form words with some of the given letters. We can certainly form short words of this kind. Then we try to find longer and longer words. The more letters we use the nearer we may come to the desired word. Could you solve a part of the problem? The desired word
