# Auto Chapter 14

is so long that it must have distinct parts. It is, probably, a compound word, or it is derived from some other word by adding some usual ending. Which usual ending could it be? ----------ATION ------------ELY Keep only a part of the condition and drop the other part. We may try to think of a long word with, possibly, as many as seven syllables and relatively few consonants, containing an X and a Y. 162 Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof The questions and suggestions of our list cannot work magic. They cannot give us the solution of all possible puzzles without any effort on our part. If the reader wishes to find the word, he must keep on trying and thinking about it. What the questions and suggestions of the list can do is to "keep the ball rolling." When, discouraged by lack of success, we are inclined to drop the problem, they may suggest to us a new trial, a new aspect, a new variation of the problem, a new stimulus; they may keep us thinking. For another example see DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBIN ING, 8. Reductio ad absurdum and indirect proof are different but related procedures. Reductio ad absurdum shows the falsity of an assump tion by deriving from it a manifest absurdity. "Reduc tion to an absurdity" is a mathematical procedure but it has some resemblance to irony which is the favorite procedure of the satirist. Irony adopts, to all appearance, a certain opinion and stresses it and overstresses it till it leads to a manifest absurdity. Indirect proof establishes the truth of an assertion by showing the falsity of the opposite assumption. Thus, indirect proof has some resemblance to a politician's trick of establishing a candidate by demolishing the repu tation of his opponent. Both "reductio ad absurdum" and indirect proof are effective tools of discovery which present themselves natu rally to an intent mind. Nevertheless, they are disliked by a few philosophers and many beginners, which is understandable; satirical people and tricky politicians do not appeal to everybody. We shall first illustrate the effectiveness of both procedures by examples and discuss objections against them afterwards. Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof 163 1. Reductio ad absurdum. Write numbers using each of the ten digits exactly once so that the sum of the numbers is exactly 100. We may learn something by trying to solve this puzzle whose statement demands some elucidation. What is the unknown? A set of numbers; and bynum bers we mean here, of course, ordinary integers. What is given? The number 100. What is the condition? The condition has two parts. First, writing the desired set of numbers, we must use each of the ten digits, o, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and g, just once. Second, the sum of all numbers in the set must be 100. Keep only a part of the condition, drop the other part. The first part alone is easy to satisfy. Take the set 19, 28, 37, 46, 50; each figure occurs just once. But, of course, the second part of the condition is not satisfied; the sum of these numbers is 180, not 100. We could, however, do better. "Try, try again." Yes, 19 + 28 + 30 + 7 + 6 + 5 + 4 = 99· The first part of the condition is satisfied, and the second part is almost satisfied; we have 99 instead of 100. Of course, we can easily satisfy the second part if we drop the first: 19 + 28 + 31 + 7 + 6 + 5 + 4 = 100. The first part is not satisfied: the figure 1 occurs twice, and o not at all; the other figures are all right. "Try, try again." After a few unsuccessful trials, however, we may be led to suspect that it is not possible to obtain 100 in the manner required. Eventually the problem arises: Prove that it is impossible to satisfy both parts of the proposed condition at the same time. 164 Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof Quite good students may find that this problem is above their heads. Yet the answer is easy enough if we have the right attitude. We have to examine the hypo thetical situation in which both parts of the condition are satisfied. We suspect that this situation cannot -actually arise and our suspicion, based on the experience of our unsuccess ful trials, has some foundation. Nevertheless, let us keep an open mind and let us face the situation in which hy pothetically, supposedly, allegedly both parts of the con dition are satisfied. Thus, let us imagine a set of num bers whose sum is 100. They must be numbers with one or two figures. There are ten figures, and these ten figures must be all different, since each of the figures, o, 1, 2, ... 9 should occur just once. Thus, the sum of all ten figures must be 0 + 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 + 9 = 45· Some of these figures denote units and others tens. It takes a little sagacity to hit upon the idea that the sum of the figures denoting tens may be of some importance. In fact, let t stand for this sum. Then the sum of the t. Therefore, remaining figures, denoting units, is 45 - the sum of all numbers in the set must be IOt + (45 - t) = 100. We have here an equation to determine t. It is of the first degree and gives t =55. 9 Now, there is something that is definitely wrong. The value of t that we have found is not an integer and t should be, of course, an integer. Starting from the sup position that both parts of the proposed condition can Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof 165 be simultaneously satisfied, we have been led to a mani fest absurdity. How can we explain this? Our original supposition must be wrong; both parts of the condition cannot be satisfied at the same time. And so we have attained our goal, we have succeeded in proving that the two parts of the proposed condition are incompatible. Our reasoning is a typical "reductio ad absurdum." 2. Remarks. Let us look back at the foregoing reason ing and understand its general trend. We wish to prove that it is impossible to fulfill a cer tain condition, that is, that the situation in which all parts of the condition are simultaneously satisfied can never arise. But, if we have proved nothing yet, we have to face the possibility that the situation could arise. Only by facirg squarely the hypothetical situation and exam ining it closely can we hope to perceive some definitely wrong point in it. And we must lay our hand upon some definitely wrong point if we wish to show conclusively that the situation is impossible. Hence we can see that the procedure that was successful in our example is rea sonable in general: We have to examine the hypothetical situation in which all parts of the condition are satisfied, although such a situation appears extremely unlikely. The more experienced reader may see here another point. The main step of our procedure consisted in set ting up an equation for t. Now, we could have arrived at the same equation without suspecting that something was wrong with the condition. If we wish to set up an equation, we have to express in mathematical language that all parts of the condition are satisfied, although we do not know yet whether it is actually possible to satisfy all these parts simultaneously. Our procedure is "open-minded." We may hope to find the unknown satisfying the condition, or we may hope to show that the condition cannot be satisfied. It matters 166 Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof little in one respect: the investigation, if it is well con ducted, starts in both cases in the same way, examining the hypothetical situation in which the condition is fulfilled, and shows only in its later course which hope is justified. Compare FIGURES, 2. Compare also PAPPUs; an analysis which ends in disproving the proposed theorem, or in showing that the proposed "problem to find" has no solution, is actually a "reductio ad absurdum." 3· Indirect proof. The prime numbers, or primes, are the numbers 2, 3, 5, 7• 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, ..• which cannot be resolved into smaller factors, although they are greater than 1. (The last clause excludes the number 1 which, obviously, cannot be resolved into smaller factors, but has a different nature and should not be counted as a prime.) The primes are the "ulti mate elements" into which all integers (greater than 1) can be decomposed. For instance, 630 = 2 • 3 . 3 . 5 • 7 is decomposed into a product of five primes. Is the series of primes infinite or does it end some where? It is natural to suspect that the series of primes never ends. If it ended somewhere, all integers could be decomposed into a finite number of ultimate elements and the world would appear "too poor" in a manner of speaking. Thus arises the problem of proving the exist ence of an infinity of prime numbers. This problem is very different from elementary mathe matical problems of the usual kind and appears at first inaccessible. Yet, as we said, it is extremely unlikely that there should be a last prime, say P. Why is it so unlikely? Let us face squarely the unlikely situation in which, hypothetically, supposedly, allegedly, there is a last prime P. Then we could write down the complete series of Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof 167 primes 2, 3, 5, 7• 11, ••. P. Why is this so unlikely? What is wrong with it? Can we point out anything that is definitely wrong? Indeed, we can. We can construct the number Q = (2 • 3 • 5 • 7 • 11 • • • P) + 1. This number Q is greater than P and therefore, allegedly, Q cannot be a prime. Consequently, Q must be divisible by a prime. Now, all primes at our disposal are, sup posedly, the numbers 2, 3, 5, ... P but Q, divided by any of these numbers, leaves the rest 1; and so Q is not divisible by any of the primes mentioned which are, hypothetically, all the primes. Now, there is something that is definitely wrong; Q must be either a prime or it must be divisible by some prime. Starting from the sup position that there is a last prime P we have been led to a manifest absurdity. How can we explain this? Our original supposition must be wrong; there cannot be a last prime P. And so we have succeeded in proving that the series of prime numbers never ends. Our proof is a typical indirect proof. (It is a famous proof too, due to Euclid; see Proposition 20 of Book IX of the Elements.) We have established our theorem (that the series of primes never ends) by disproving its contradictory op posite (that the series of primes ends somewhere) which we have disproved by deducing from it a manifest ab surdity. Thus we have combined indirect proof with "reductio ad absurdum"; this combination is also very typical. 4· Objections. The procedures which we are studying encountered considerable opposition. Many objections have been raised which are, possibly, only various forms of the same fundamental objection. We discuss here a "practical" form of the objection, which is on our level. 168 Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof To find a not obvious proof is a considerable intel lectual achievement but to learn such a proof, or even to understand it thoroughly costs also a certain amount of mental effort. Naturally enough, we wish to retain some benefit from our effort, and, of course, what we retain in our memory should be true and correct and not false or absurd. But it seems difficult to retain something true from a "reductio ad absurdum." The procedure starts from a false assumption and derives from it consequences which are equally, but perhaps more visibly, false till it reaches a last consequence which is manifestly false. If we do not wish to store falsehoods in our memory we should forget everything as quickly as possible which is, however, not feasible because all points must be remembered sharply and correctly during our study of the proof. The objection to indirect proofs can be now stated very briefly. Listening to such a proof, we are obliged to focus our attention all the time upon a false assumption which we should forget and not upon the true theorem which we should retain. If we wish to judge correctly of the merits of these objections, we should distinguish between two uses of the "reductio ad absurdum," as a tool of research and as a means of exposition, and make the same distinction concerning the indirect proof. It must be confessed that "reductio ad absurdum" as a means of exposition is not an unmixed blessing. Such a "reductio," especially if it is long, may become very pain ful indeed for the reader or listener. All the derivations which we examine in succession are correct but all the situations which we have to face are impossible. Even the verbal expression may become tedious if it insists, as it should, on emphasizing that everything is based on an initial assumption; the words "hypothetically," "sup- Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof 169 posedly," "allegedly" must recur incessantly, or some other device must be applied continually. We wish to reject and forget the situation as impossible but we have to retain and examine it as the basis for the next step, and this inner discord may become unbearable in the long run. Yet it would be foolish to repudiate "reductio ad absurdum" as a tool of discovery. It may present itself naturally and bring a decision when all other means seem to be exhausted as the foregoing examples may show. We need some experience to perceive that there is no essential opposition between our two contentions. Ex perience shows that usually there is little difficulty in converting an indirect proof into a direct proof, or in rearranging a proof found by a long "reductio ad ab surdum" into a more pleasant form from which the "reductio ad absurdum" may even completely disappear (or, after due preparation, it may be compressed into a few striking sentences). In short, if we wish to make full use of our capacities, we should be familiar both with "reductio ad absurdum" and with indirect proof. When, however, we have suc ceeded in deriving a result by either of these methods we should not fail to look back at the solution and ask: Can you derive the result differently? Let us illustrate by examples what we have said. 5· Rearranging a reductio ad absurdum. We look back at the reasoning presented under 1. The reductio ad absurdum started from a situation which, eventually, turned out to be impossible. Let us however carve out a part of the argument which is independent of the initial false assumption and contains positive information. Re considering what we have done, we may perceive that this much is doubtless true: If a set of numbers with one 170 Reductio ad Absurdum and Indirect Proof or two digits is written so that each of the ten figures occurs just once, then the sum of the set is of the form JOt+ (45 - t) = 9 (t + 5). Thus, this sum is divisible by g. The proposed puzzle demands however that this sum should be 100. Is this possible? No, it is not, since 100 is not divisible by g. The "reductio ad absurdum" which led to the discov ery of the argument vanished from our new presentation. By the way, a reader acquainted with the procedure of "casting out nines" can see now the whole argument at a glance. 6. Converting an indirect proof. We look back at the reasoning presented under 3· Reconsidering carefully what we have done, we may find elements of the argu ment which are independent of any false assumption, yet the best clue comes from a reconsideration of the mean ing of the original problem itself. What do we mean by saying that the series of primes never ends? Evidently, just this: when we have ascer tained any finite set of primes as 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, . . . P, where P is the last prime hitherto found, there is always one more prime. Thus, what must we do to prove the existence of an infinity of primes? We have to point out a way of finding a prime different from all primes hith erto found. Thus, our "problem to prove" is in fact re duced to a "problem to find": Being given the primes 2, 3, 5, ... P, find a new prime N different from all the given primes. Having restated our original problem iD this new form, we have taken the main step. It is relatively easy now to see how to use the essential parts of our former argu ment for the new purpose. In fact, the number Q = (2 • 3 · 5 · 7 · 11 ... P) + 1 is certainly divisible by a prime. Let us take-this is the Routine Problem idea-any prime divisor of Q (for instance, the smallest one) for N. (Of course, if Q happens to be a prime, then N = Q.) Obviously, Q divided by any of the primes 2, 3, 5, ... P leaves the remainder 1 and, therefore, none of these numbers can be N which is a divisor of Q. But that is all we need: N is a prime, and different from all hitherto found primes 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, . . . P. This proof gives a definite procedure of prolonging again and again the series of primes, without limit. Noth ing is indirect in it, no impossible situation needs to be considered. Yet, fundamentally, it is the same as our former indirect proof which we have succeeded in con verting. Redundant. See CONDITION. Routine problem may be called the problem to solve the equation x2 - 3x + 2 = o if the solution of the gen eral quadratic equation was explained and illustrated before so that the student has nothing to do but to sub stitute the numbers -3 and 2 for certain letters which appear in the general solution. Even if the quadratic equation was not solved generally in "letters" but half a dozen similar quadratic equations with numerical co efficients were solved just before, the problem should be called a "routine problem." In general, a problem is a "routine problem" if it can be solved either by substi tuting special data into a formerly solved general prob lem, or by following step by step, without any trace of originality, some well-worn conspicuous example. Setting a routine problem, the teacher thrusts under the nose of the student an immediate and decisive answer to the question: Do you know a related problem? Thus, the student needs nothing but a little care and patience in following a cut-and-dried precept, and he has no oppor tunity to use his judgment or his inventive faculties. Rules of Style Routine problems, even many routine problems, may be necessary in teaching mathematics but to make the students do no other kind is inexcusable. Teaching the mechanical performance of routine mathematical opera tions and nothing else is well under the level of the cookbook because kitchen recipes do leave something to the imagination and judgment of the cook but mathe matical recipes do not. Rules of discovery. The first rule of discovery is to have brains and good luck. The second rule of discovery is to sit tight and wait till you get a bright idea. It may be good to be reminded somewhat rudely that certain aspirations are hopeless. Infallible rules of dis covery leading to the solution of all possible mathemati cal problems would be more desirable than the philoso phers' stone, vainly sought by the alchemists. Such rules would work magic; but there is no such thing as magic. To find unfailing rules applicable to all sorts of prob lems is an old philosophical dream; but this dream will never be more than a dream. A reasonable sort of heuristic cannot aim at unfailing rules; but it may endeavor to study procedures (mental operations, moves, steps) which are typically useful in solving problems. Such procedures are practiced by every sane person sufficiently interested in his problem. They are hinted by certain stereotyped questions and sugges tions which intelligent people put to themselves and in telligent teachers to their students. A collection of such questions and suggestions, stated with sufficient general ity and neatly ordered, may be less desirable than the philosophers' stone but can be provided. The list we study provides such a collection. Rules of style. The first rule of style 1s to have some thing to say. The second rule of style is to control your- Separate the Various Parts of the Condition 173 self when, by chance, you have two things to say; say first one, then the other, not both at the same time. Rules of teaching. The first rule of teaching is to know what you are supposed to teach. The second rule of teaching is to know a little more than what you are supposed to teach. First things come first. The author of this book does not tl'ink that all rules of conduct for teachers are com pletely useless; otherwise, he would not have dared to write a whole book about the conduct of teachers and students. Yet it should not be forgotten that a teacher of mathematics should know some mathematics, and that a teacher wishing to impart the right attitude of mind toward problems to his students should have acquired that attitude himself. Separate the various parts of the condition. Our first duty is to understand the problem. Having understood the problem as a whole, we go into detail. We consider its principal parts, the unknown, the data, the condition, each by itself. When we have these parts well in mind but no particularly helpful idea has yet occurred to us, we go into further detail. We consider the various data, each datum by itself. Having understood the condition as a whole, we separate its various parts, and we consider each part by itself. We see now the role of the suggestion that we have to discuss here. It tends to provoke a step that we have to take when we are trying to see the problem distinctly and have to go into finer and finer detail. It is a step in DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBINING. Separate the various parts of the condition. Can you write them down? We often have opportunity to ask this question when we are SETTING UP EQUATIONS. 174 Setting Up Equations Setting up equations is like translation from one lan guage into another (NOTATION, 1). This comparison, used by Newton in his Arithmetica Universalis, may help to clarify the nature of certain difficulties often felt both by students and by teachers. 1. To set up equations means to express in mathemati cal symbols a condition that is stated in words; it is translation from ordinary language into the language of mathematical formulas. The difficulties which we may have in setting up equations are difficulties of translation. In order to translate a sentence from English into French two things are necessary. First, we must under stand thoroughly the English sentence. Second, we must be familiar with the
