# Auto Chapter 15

forms of expression peculiar to the French language. The situation is very similar when we attempt to express in mathematical symbols a condition proposed in words. First, we must understand thoroughly the condition. Second, we must be familiar with the forms of mathematical expression. An English sentence is relatively easy to translate into French if it can be translated word for word. But there are English idioms which cannot be translated into French word for word. If our sentence contains such idioms, the translation becomes difficult; we have to pay less attention to the separate words, and more attention to the whole meaning; before translating the sentence, we may have to rearrange it. It is very much the same in setting up equations. In easy cases, the verbal statement splits almost automati cally into successive parts, each of which can be immedi ately written down in mathematical symbols. In more difficult cases, the condition has parts which cannot be immediately translated into mathematical symbols. If this is so, we must pay less attention to the verbal state ment, and concentrate more upon the meaning. Before Setting Up Equations 175 we start writing formulas, we may have to rearrange the condition, and we should keep an eye on the resources of mathematical notation while doing so. In all cases, easy or difficult, we have to understand the condition, to separate the various parts of the condition, and to ask: Can you write them down? In easy cases, we succeed without hesitation in dividing the condition into parts that can be written down in mathematical symbols; in difficult cases, the appropriate division of the condi tion is less obvious. The foregoing explanation should be read again after the study of the following examples. 2. Find two quantities whose sum is 78 and whose product is 1296. We divide the page by a vertical line. On one side, we write the verbal statement split into appropriate parts. On the other side, we write algebraic signs, opposite to the corresponding part of the verbal statement. The orig inal is on the left, the translation into symbols on the right. Stating the problem in English in algebraic language Find two quantities whose sum is 78 and whose product is 1296 x, y X+ y = 78 xy = 12g6. In this case, the verbal statement splits almost auto matically into successive parts, each of which can be immediately written down in mathematical symbols. 3· Find the breadth and the height of a right prism with square base, being given the volume, 63 cu. in., and the area of the surface, 102 sq. in. What are the unknowns? The side of the base, say x, and the altitude of the prism, say y. Setting Up Equations What are the data? The volume, 63, and the area, 102. What is the condition? The prism whose base is a square with side x and whose altitude is y must have the volume 63 and the area 102. Separate the various parts of the condition. There are two parts, one concerned with the volume, the other with the area. We can scarcely hesitate in dividing the whole condi tion just in these two parts; but we cannot write down these parts "immediately." We must know how to calcu late the volume and the various parts of the area. Yet, if we know that much geometry, we can easily restate both parts of the condition so that the translation into equa tions is feasible. We write on the left hand side of the page an essentially rearranged and expanded statement of the problem, ready for translation into algebraic language. Of a right prism with square base find the side of the base and the altitude. First. The volume is given. The area of the base which is a square with side x and the altitude determine which is their product. Second. The area of the surface is given. The surface consists of two squares with side x and of four rectangles, each with base x and altitude y, whose sum is the area. the volume X y 102 4XY 2X 2 + 4XY = 102. 4· Being given the equation of a straight line and the Setting Up Equations 177 coordinates of a point, find the point which is symmetri cal to the given point with respect to the given straight line. This is a problem of plane analytic geometry. What is the unknown? A point, with coordinates, say, p, q. What is given? The equation of a straight line, say y = mx + n, and a point with coordinates, say, a, b. What is the condition? The points (a, b) and (p, q) are symmetrical to each other with respect to the line y = mx+ n. We now reach the essential difficulty which is to divide the condition into parts each of which can be expressed in the language of analytic geometry. The nature of this difficulty must be well understood. A decomposition of the condition into parts may be logically unobjection able and nevertheless useless. What we need here is a decomposition into parts which are fit for analytic ex pression. In order to find such a decomposition we must go back to the definition of symmetry, but keep an eye on the resources of analytic geometry. What is meant by symmetry with respect to a straight line? What geometric relations can we express simply in analytic geometry? We concentrate upon the first question, but we should not forget the second. Thus, eventually, we may find the de composition which we are going to state. The given point and the point required are so related that first, the line joining them is perpendicular to the given line, and second, the midpoint of the line joining them lies on the given line. (a, b) (p, q) q- b _ p- a I m b + q = m a + p + n. 2 2 Signs of Progress Signs of progress. As Columbus and his companions sailed westward across an unknown ocean they were cheered whenever they saw birds. They regarded a bird as a favorable sign, indicating the nearness of land. But in this they were repeatedly disappointed. They watched for other signs too. They thought that floating seaweed or low banks of cloud might indicate land, but they were again disappointed. One day, however, the signs multi plied. On Thursday, the 11th of October, 1492, "they saw sandpipers, and a green reed near the ship. Those of the caravel Pinta saw a cane and a pole, and they took up another small pole which appeared to have been worked by iron; also another bit of cane, a land-plant, and a small board. The crew of the caravel Nifia also saw signs of land, and a small branch covered with berries. Every· one breathed afresh and rejoiced at these signs." And in fact the next day they sighted land, the first island of a New World. Our undertaking may be important or unimportant, our problem of any kind-when we are working in tensely, we watch eagerly for signs of progress as Co lumbus and his companions watched for signs of ap proaching land. We shall discuss a few examples in order to understand what can be reasonably regarded as a sign of approaching the solution. 1. Examp!es. I have a chess problem. I have to mate the black king in, say, two moves. On the chessboard there is a white knight, quite a distance from the black king, that is apparently superfluous. What is it good for? I am obliged to leave this question unanswered at first. Yet after various trials, I hit upon a new move and ob serve that it would bring that apparently superfluous white knight into play. This observation gives me a new hope. I regard it as a favorable sign: that new move has some chance to be the right one. Why? Signs of Progress 179 In a well-constructed chess problem there is no super fluous piece. Therefore, we have to take into account all chessmen on the board; we have to use all the data. The correct solution does certainly use all the pieces, even that apparently superfluous white knight. In this last respect, the new move that I contemplate agrees with the correct move that I am supposed to find. The new move looks like the correct move; it might be the correct move. It is interesting to consider a similar situation in a mathematical problem. My task is to express the area of a triangle in terms of its three sides, a, b, and c. I have already made some sort of plan. I know, more or less clearly, which geometrical connections I have to take into account and what sort of calculations I have to per form. Yet I am not quite sure whether my plan will work. If now, proceeding along the line prescribed by my plan, I observe that the quantity .y'b+c-a enters into the expression of the area I am about to con struct, I have good reason to be cheered. Why? In fact, it must be taken into account that the sum of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the third side. This involves a certain restriction. The given lengths, a, b, and c cannot be quite arbitrary; for instance, b + c must be greater than a. This is an essential part of the condition, and we should use the whole condition. If b + c is not greater than a the formula I seek is bound to become illusory. Now, the square root displayed above becomes imaginary if b + c - a is negative-that is, if b + c is less than a-and so the square root becomes unfit to represent a real quantity under just those circum stances under which the desired expression is bound to become illusory. Thus my formula, into which that 180 Signs of Progress square root enters, has an important property in com mon with the true formula for the area. My formula looks like the true formula; it might be the true for mula. Here is one more example. Some time ago, I wished to theorem in solid geometry. Without much prove a trouble I found a first remark that appeared to be per tinent; but then I got stuck. Something was missing to finish the proof. When I gave up that day I had a much clearer notion than at the outset how the proof should look, how the gap should be filled; but I was not able to fill it. The next day, after a good night's rest, I looked again into the question and soon hit upon an analogous theorem in plane geometry. In a flash I was convinced that now I had got hold of the solution and I had, I think, good reason too to be convinced. Why? In fact, analogy is a great guide. The solution of a problem in solid geometry often depends on an anal ogous problem in plane geometry (see ANALOGY, 3-7). Thus, in my case, there was a chance from the outset that the desired proof would use as a lemma some theorem of plane geometry of the kind which actually came to my mind. "This theorem looks like the lemma I need; it might be the lemma I need" -such was my reasoning. If Columbus and his men had taken the trouble to reason explicitly, they would have reasoned in some simi lar way. They knew how the sea looks near the shore. They knew that, more often than on the open sea, there are birds in the air, coming from the land, and objects floating in the water, detached from the seashore. Many of the men must have observed such things when from former voyages they had returned to their home port. The day before that memorable date on which they sighted the island of San Salvador, as the floating objects in the water became so frequent, they thought: "It looks Signs of Progress as if we were approaching some land; we may be ap proaching some land" and "everyone breathed afresh and rejoiced at these signs." 2. Heuristic character of signs of progress. Let us insist upon a point which is perhaps already clear to everyone; but it is very important and, therefore, it should be com pletely clear. The type of reasoning illustrated by the foregoing ex amples deserves to be noticed and taken into account seriously, although it yields only a plausible indication and not an unfailing certainty. Let us restate pedan tically, at full length, in rather unnatural detail, one of these reasonings: If we are approaching land, we often see birds. Now we see birds. Therefore, probably, we are approaching land. Without the word "probably" the conclusion would be an outright fallacy. In fact, Columbus and his com panions saw birds many times but were disappointed later. Just once came the day on which they saw sand pipers followed by the day of discovery. With the word "probably" the conclusion is reason able and natural but by no means a proof, a demonstra tive conclusion; it is only an indication, a heuristic suggestion. It would be a great mistake to forget that such a conclusion is only probable, and to regard it as certain. But to disregard such conclusions entirely would be a still greater mistake. If you take a heuristic conclu sion as certain, you may be fooled and disappointed; but if you neglect heuristic conclusions altogether you will make no progress at all. The most important signs of progress are heuristic. Should we trust them? Should we follow them? Follow, but keep your eyes open. Trust but look. And never renounce your judgment. Signs of Progress 3· Clearly expressible signs. We can look at the fore going examples from another point of view. In one of these examples, we regarded as a favorable sign that we succeeded in bringing into play a datum not used before (the white knight) . We were quite right to so regard it. In fact, to solve a problem is, essentially, to find the connection between the data and the unknown. Moreover we should, at least in well-stated problems, use all the data, connect each of them with the unknown. Thus, bringing one more datum into play is quite prop erly felt as progress, as a step forward. In another example, we regarded as a favorable sign that an essential clause of the condition was appropri ately taken into account by our formula. We were quite right to so regard it. In fact, we should use the whole condition. Thus, taking into account one more clause of the condition is justly felt as progress, as a move in the right direction. In still another example, we regarded as a favorable sign the emergence of a simpler analogous problem. This also is justified. Indeed, analogy is one of the main sources of invention. If other means fail, we should try to imagine an analogous problem. Therefore, if such a problem emerges spontaneously, by its own accord, we naturally feel elated; we feel that we are approaching the solution. After these examples, we can now easily grasp the gen eral ide4. There are certain mental operations typically useful in solving problems. (The most usual operations of this kind are listed in this book.) If such a typical operation succeeds (if one more datum is connected with the unknown-one more clause of the condition is taken into account-a simpler analogous problem is intro duced) its success is felt as a sign of progress. Having understood this essential point, we can express with some Signs of Progress clearness the nature of still other signs of progress. All we have to do is to read down our list and look at the various questions and suggestions from our newly ac quired point of view. Thus, understanding clearly the nature of the un known means progress. Clearly disposing the various data so that we can easily recall any one also means progress. Visualizing vividly the condition as a whole may mean an essential advance; and separating the condition into ap propriate parts may be an important step forward. When we have found a figure that we can easily imagine, or a notation that we can easily retain, we can reasonably be lieve that we have made some progress. Recalling a problem related to ours and solved before may be a de cisive move in the right direction. And so on, and so forth. To each mental operation clearly conceived corresponds a certain sign clearly ex pressible. Our list, appropriately read, lists also signs of progress. Now, the questions and suggestions of our list are simple, obvious, just plain common sense. This has been said repeatedly and the same can be said of the con nected signs of progress we discuss here. To read such signs no occult science is needed, only a little common sense and, of course, a little experience. 4· Less clearly expressible signs. When we work in tently, we feel keenly the pace of our progress: when it is rapid we are elated; when it is slow we are depressed. We feel such differences quite clearly without being able to point out any distinct sign. Moods, feelings, general aspects of the situation serve to indicate our progress. They are not easy to express. "It looks good to me," or "It is not so good," say the unsophisticated. More sophis ticated people express themselves with some nuance: "This is a well-balanced plan," or "No, something is still Signs of Progress lacking and that spoils the harmony." Yet behind primi tive or vague expressions there is an unmistakable feeling which we follow with confidence and which leads us frequently in the right direction. If such feeling is very strong and emerges suddenly, we speak of inspiration. People usually cannot doubt their inspirations and are sometimes fooled by them. In fact, we should treat guid ing feelings and inspirations just as we treat the more clearly expressible signs of progress which we have con sidered before. Trust, but keep your eyes open. Always follow your inspiration-with a grain of doubt. [What is the nature of those guiding feelings? Is there some less vague meaning behind words of such aesthetic nuances as "well-balanced," or "harmonious"? These questions may be more speculative than practical, but the present context indicates answers which perhaps de serve to be stated: Since the more clearly expressible signs of progress are connected with the success or failure of certain rather definite mental operations, we may suspect that our less clearly expressible guiding feelings may be similarly connected with other, more obscure, mental activities-perhaps with activities whose nature is more "psychological" and less "logical."] 5· How signs help. I have a plan. I see pretty clearly where I should begin and which steps I should take first. Yet I do not quite see the lay-out of the road farther on; I am not quite certain that my plan will work; and, in any case, I have still a long way to go. Therefore, I start out cautiously in the direction indicated by my plan and keep a lookout for signs of progress. If the signs are rare or indistinct, I become more hesitant. And if for a long time they fail to appear altogether, I may lose courage, turn back, and try another road. On the other hand, if the signs become more frequent as I proceed, if they multiply, my hesitation fades, my spirits rise, and I move Signs of Progress with increasing confidence, just as Columbus and his companions did before sighting the island of San Sal vador. Signs may guide our acts. Their absence may warn us of a blind alley and save us time and useless exertion; their presence may cause us to concentrate our effort upon the right spot. Yet signs may also be deceptive. I once abandoned a certain path for lack of signs, but a man who came after me and followed that path a little farther made an im portant discovery-to my great annoyance and long-last ing regret. He not only had more perseverance than I did but he also read correctly a certain sign which I had failed to notice. Again, I may follow a road cheerfully, encouraged by favorable signs, and run against an un suspected and insurmountable obstacle. Yes, signs may misguide us in any single case, but they guide us right in the majority of them. A hunter may misinterpret now and then the traces of his game but he must be right on the average, otherwise he could not make a living by hunting. It takes experience to interpret the signs correctly. Some of Columbus's companions certainly knew by ex perience how the sea looks near the shore and so they were able to read the signs which suggested that they were approaching land. The expert knows by experience how the situation looks and feels when the solution is near and so he is able to read the signs which indicate that he is approaching it. The expert knows more signs than the inexperienced, and he knows them better; his main advantage may consist in such knowledge. An ex pert hunter notices traces of game and appraises even their freshness or staleness where the inexperienced one is unable to see anything. The main advantage of the exceptionally talented may 186 Signs of Progress consist in a sort of extraordinary mental sensibility. With exquisite sensibility, he feels subtle signs of progress or notices their absence where the less talented are unable to perceive a difference. (6. Heuristic syllogism. In section 2 we came across a mode of heuristic reasoning that deserves further consid eration and a technical term. We begin by restating that reasoning in the following form: If we are approaching land, we often see birds. Now we see birds. Therefore, it becomes more credible that we are ap proaching land. The two statements above the horizontal line may be called the premises, the statement under the line, the conclusion. And the whole pattern of reasoning may be termed a heuristic syllogism. The premises are stated here in the same form as in section 2, but the conclusion is more carefully worded. An essential circumstance is better emphasized. Colum bus and his men conjectured from the beginning that they would eventually find land sailing westward; and they must have given some credence to this conjecture, otherwise they would not have started out at all. As they proceeded, they related every incident, major or minor, to their dominating question: "Are we approaching land?'' Their confidence rose and fell as events occurred or failed to occur, and each man's beliefs fluctuated more or less differently according to his background and char acter. The whole dramatic tension of the voyage is due to such fluctuations of confidence. The heuristic syllogism quoted exhibits a reasonable ground for a change in the level of confidence. To occa sion such changes is the essential role of this kind of Signs of Progress reasoning and this point is better expressed by the word ing given here than by the one in section 2. The general pattern suggested by our example can be exhibited thus: If A is true, then B is also true, as we know. Now, it turns out that B is true. Therefore, A becomes more credible. Still shorter: If A then B B true A more credible In this schematic statement the horizontal line stands for the word "therefore" and expresses the implication, the essential link between the premises and the conclusion.] [7· Nature of plausible reasoning. In this little book we are discussing a philosophical question. We discuss it as practically and informally and as far from high-brow modes of expression
