# Auto Chapter 16

as we can, but nevertheless our subject is philosophical. It is concerned with the n ature of heuristic reasoning and, by extension, with a kind of reasoning which is nondemonstrative although important and which we shall call, for lack of a better term, plau sible reasoning. The signs that convince the inventor that his idea is good, the indications that guide us in our everyday affairs, the circumstantial evidence of the lawyer, the in ductive evidence of the scientist, statistical evidence invoked in many and diverse subjects-all these kinds of evidence agree in two essential points. First, they do not have the certainty of a strict demonstration. Second, they are useful in acquiring essentially new knowledge, and even indispensable to any not purely mathematical or !88 Signs of Progress logical knowledge, to any knowledge concerned with the physical world. We could call the reasoning that under lies this kind of evidence "heuristic reasoning" or "induc tive reasoning" or (if we wish to avoid stretching the meaning of existing terms) "plausible reasoning." We accept here the last term. The heuristic syllogism introduced in the foregoing may be regarded as the simplest and most widespread pattern of plausible reasoning. It reminds us of a classi cal pattern of demonstrative reasoning, of the so-called "modus tollens of hypothetical syllogism." We exhibit here both patterns side by side: Demonstrative If A then B B false Heuristic If A then B B true A false A more credible The comparison of these patterns may be instructive. It may grant us an insight, not easily obtainable elsewhere, into the nature of plausible (heuristic, inductive) rea soning. Both patterns have the same first premise: If A then B. They differ in the second premise. The statements: B false B true are exactly opposite to each other but they are of "simi lar logical nature," they are on the same "logical level." The great difference arises after the premises. The con clusions A false A more credible are on different logical levels and their relations to their respective premises are of a different logical nature. The conclusion of the demonstrative syllogism is of the Signs of Progress 189 same logical nature as the premises. Moreover, this con clusion is fully expressed and is fully supported by the premises. If my neighbor and I agree to accept the prem ises, we cannot reasonably disagree about accepting also the conclusion, however different our tastes or other convictions may be. The conclusion of the heuristic syllogism differs from the premises in its logical nature; it is more vague, not so sharp, less fully expressed. This conclusion is comparable to a force, has direction and magnitude. It pushes us in a certain direction: A becomes more credible. The conclu sion also has a certain strength: A may become much more credible, or just a little more credible. The conclu sion is not fully expressed and is not fully supported by the premises. The direction is expressed and is implied by the premises, the magnitude is not. For any reasonable person, the premises involve that A becomes more cred ible (certainly not less credible). Yet my neighbor and I can honestly disagree how much more credible A be comes, since our temperaments, our backgrounds, and our unstated reasons may be different. In the demonstrative syllogism the premises constitute a full basis on which the conclusion rests. If both prem ises stand, the conclusion stands too. If we receive some new information that does not change our belief in the premises, it cannot change our belief in the conclusion. In the heuristic syllogism the premises constitute only one part of the basis on which the conclusion rests, the fully expressed, the "visible" part of the basis; there is an unexpressed, invisible part, formed by something else, by inarticulate feelings perhaps, or by unstated reasons. In fact, it can happen that we receive some new information that leaves our belief in both premises completely intact, but influences the trust we put in A in a way just oppo site to that expressed in the conclusion. To find A more plausible on the ground of the premises of our heuristic Specialization syllogism is only reasonable. Yet tomorrow I may find grounds, not interfering at all with these premises, that make A appear less plausible, or even definitively refute it. The conclusion may be shaken and even overturned completely by commotions in the invisible parts of its foundation, although the premises, the visible part, stand quite firm. These remarks seem to make somewhat more under standable the nature of heuristic, inductive, and other sorts of not demonstrative plausible reasoning, which appear so baffling and elusive when approached from the point of view of purely demonstrative logic. Many more concrete examples, the consideration of other kinds of heuristic syllogism, and an investigation of the concept of probability and other allied concepts seem to be nec essary to complete the approach here chosen; cf. the author's Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning.] Heuristic reasons are important although they prove nothing. To clarify our heuristic reasons is also impor tant although behind any reason clarified there are many others that remain obscure and are perhaps still more important. Specialization is passing from the consideration of a given set of objects to that of a smaller set, or of just one object, contained in the given set. Specialization is often useful in the solution of problems. 1. Example. In a triangle, let r be the radius of the inscribed circle, R the radius of the circumscribed circle, and H the longest altitude. Then r+R <H. We have to prove (or disprove) this theorem9; we have a "problem to prove." 9 The American Mathematical Monthly, vol. 50 (1943), p. 124 and vol. 51 (1944), pp. 234-236. Specialization The proposed theorem is of an unusual sort. We can scarcely remember any theorem about triangles with a similar conclusion. If nothing else occurs to us, we may test some special case of this unfamiliar assertion. Now, the best known special triangle is the equilateral triangle for which H r = - 3 so that, in this case, the assertion is correct. R = 2H 3 If no other idea presents itself, we may test the more extended special case o£ isosceles triangles. The form of an isosceles triangle varies with the angle at the vertex and there are two extreme (or limiting) cases, the one in which the angle at the vertex becomes o 0 , and the other in which it becomes 180°. In the first extreme case the base of the isosceles triangle vanishes and visibly r=o I R=-H 2 thus, the assertion is verified. In the second limiting case, however, all three heights vanish and r = o R = oo The assertion is not verified. We have proved that the proposed theorem is false, and so we have solved our problem. H= o. By the way, it is clear that the assertion is also false for very flat isosceles triangles whose angle at the vertex is nearly 180° so that we may "officially" disregard the extreme cases whose consideration may appear as not quite "orthodox." 2. "L'exception confirme la regie." "The exception proves the rule." We must take this widely known saying as a joke, laughing at the laxity of a certain sort of logic. If we take matters seriously, one exception is enough, of course, to refute irrefragably any would-be rule or gen- Specialization eral statement. The most usual and, in some respects, the best method to refute such a statement consists precisely in exhibiting an object that does not comply with it; such an object is called a counter-example by certain writers. The allegedly general statement is concerned with a certain set of objects; in order to refute the statement we specialize, we pick out from the set an object that does not comply with it. The foregoing example (under 1) shows how it is done. We may examine at first any sim ple special case, that is, any object chosen more or less at random which we can easily test. If the test shows that the case is not in accordance with the general statement, the statement is refuted and our task finished. If, how ever, the object examined complies with the statement we may possibly derive some hint from its examination. We may receive the impression that the statement could be true, after all, and some suggestion in which direction we should seek the proof. Or, we may receive, as in our example under 1, some suggestion in which direction we should seek the counter-example, that is, which other special cases should we test. We may modify the case we have just examined, vary it, investigate some more ex tended special case, look around for extreme cases, as exemplified under 1. Extreme cases are particularly instructive. If a general statement is supposed to apply to all mammals it must apply even to such an unusual mammal as the whale. Let us not forget this extreme case of the whale. Exam ining it, we may refute the general statement; there is a good chance for that, since such extreme cases are apt to be overlooked by the inventors of generalizations. If, however, we find that the general statement is verified even in the extreme case, the inductive evidence derived from this verification will be strong, just because the Specialization 193 prospect of refutation was strong. Thus, we are tempted to reshape the saying from which we started: "Prospective exceptions test the rule." 3· Example. Given the speeds of two ships and their positions at a certain moment; each ship steers a recti linear course with constant speed. Find the distance of the two ships when they are nearest to each other. What is the unknown? The shortest distance between two moving bodies. The bodies have to be considered as material points. What are the data? The initial positions of the moving material points, and the speed of each. These speeds are constant in amount and direction. p A FIG. 19 What is the condition? The distance has to be ascer tained when it is the shortest, that is, at the moment when the two moving points (ships) are nearest to each other. Draw a figure. Introduce suitable notation. In Fig. tg, the points A and B mark the given initial positions of 194 Specialization the two ships. The directed line-segments (vectors) AP and BQ represent the given speeds so that the first ship proceeds along the straight line through the points A and P, and covers the distance AP in unit time. The second ship travels similarly along the straight line BQ. What is the unknown? The shortest distance of the two ships, the one traveling along AP and the other along BQ. It is clear by now what we should find; yet, if we wish to use only elementary means, we may be still in the dark how we should find it. The problem is not too easy and its difficulty has some peculiar nuance which we may try to express by saying that "there is too much variety." The initial positions, A and B, and the speeds, AP and BQ, can be given in various ways; in fact, the four points A, B, P, Q may be chosen arbitrarily. Now, whatever the data may be, the required solution must apply and we do not see yet how to fit the same solution to all these pos sibilities. Out of such feeling of "too much variety" this question and answer may eventually emerge: Could you imagine a more accessible related problem? A more special problem? Of course, there is the extreme special case in which one of the speeds vanishes. Yes, the ship in B may lay at anchor, Q may coincide with B. The shortest distance from the ship at rest to the moving ship is the perpendicular to the straight line along which the la tter moves. 4· If the foregoing idea emerges with the premonition that there is more ahead and with the feeling that that extreme special case (which could appear as too simple to be relevant) has some role to play-then it is a bright idea indeed. H ere is a problem related to yours_, that specialized problem you just solved. Could you use it? Could you use its result? Should you introduce some auxiliary elem ent Specialization 195 in order to make its use possible? It should be used, but how? How cot.ld the result of the case in which B is at rest be used in the case in which B is moving? Rest is a special case of motion. And motion is relative-and, therefore, whatever the given velocity of B may be I can consider B as being at rest! Here is the idea more clearly: If I impart to the whole system, consisting of both ships, the same uniform motion, the relative positions do not change, the relative distances remain the same, and so does especially the shortest relative distance of the two ships required by the problem. Now, I can impart a motion that reduces the speed of one of the ships to zero, p A FIG. 20 and so reduces the general case of the problem to the special case just solved. Let me add a velocity, opposite to BQ but of the same amount, both to BQ and to AP. This is the auxiliary element that makes the use of the special result possible. See Fig. 20 for the construction of the shortest distance, BS. 196 Specialization 5· The foregoing solution (under 3, 4) has a logical pattern that deserves to be analyzed and remembered. In order to solve our original problem (under 3, :first lines) we have solved first another problem which we may call appropriately the auxiliary problem (under 3, last lines). This auxiliary problem is a special case of the original problem (the extreme special case in which one of the two ships is at rest). The original problem was proposed, the auxiliary problem invented in the course of the solution. The original problem looked hard, the solution of the auxiliary problem was immediate. The auxiliary problem was, as a special case, in fact much less ambitious than the original problem. How is it then pos sible that we were able to solve the original problem on the basis of the auxiliary problem? Because in reducing the original problem to the auxiliary problem, we added a substantial supplementary remark (on relativity of motion). We succeeded in solving our original problem thanks to two remarks. First, we invented an advantageous aux iliary problem. Second, we discovered an appropriate supplementary remark to pass from the auxiliary prob lem to the original problem. We solved the proposed problem in two steps as we might cross a creek in two steps provided we were lucky enough to discover an appropriate stone in the middle which could serve as a momentary foothold. To sum up, we used the less difficult, less ambitious, special, auxiliary problem as a stepping stone in solving the more difficult, more ambitious, general, original problem. 6. Specialization has many other uses which we can not discuss here. It may be just mentioned that it can be useful in testing the solution (cAN YOU CHECK THE RE SULT? 2). Subconscious Work 197 A somewhat primitive kind of specialization is often useful to the teacher. It consists in giving some concrete interpretation to the abstract mathematical elements of the problem. For instance, if there is a rectangular paral lelepiped in the problem, the teacher may take the class room in which he talks as example (section 8). In solid analytic geometry, a corner of the classroom may serve as the origin of coordinates, the floor and two walls as coordinate planes, two horizontal edges of the room and one vertical edge as coordinate axes. Explaining the notion of a surface of revolution, the teacher draws a curve with chalk on the door and opens it slowly. These are certainly simple tricks but nothing should be omitted that has some chance to bring home mathematics to the students: Mathematics being a very abstract science should be presented very concretely. Subconscious work. One evening I wished to discuss with a friend a certain author but I could not remember the author's name. I was annoyed, because I remembered fairly well one of his stories. I remembered also some story about the author himself which I wanted to tell; I remembered, in fact, everything except the name. Re peatedly, I tried to recollect that name but all in vain. The next morning, as soon as I thought of the annoy ance of the evening before, the name occurred to me without any effort. The reader, very likely, remembers some similar ex perience of his own. And, if he is a passionate problem solver, he has probably had some similar experience with problems. It often happens that you have no success at all with a problem; you work very hard yet without find ing anything. But when you come back to the problem after a night's rest, or a few days' interruption, a bright idea appears and you solve the problem easily. The 198 Subconscious Work nature of the problem matters little; a forgotten word, a difficult word from a crossword-puzzle, the beginning of an annoying letter, or the solutio11 of a mathematical problem may occur in this way. Such happenings give the impression of subconscious work. The fact is that a problem, after prolonged ab sence, may return into consciousness essentially clarified, much nearer to its solution than it was when it dropped out of consciousness. Who clarified it, who brought it nearer to the solution? Obviously, oneself, working at it subconsciously. It is difficult to give any other answer; although psychologists have discovered the beginnings of another answer which may turn out some day to be more satisfactory. Whatever may or may not be the merits of the theory of subconscious work, it is certain that there is a limit beyond which we should not force the conscious reflec tion. There are certain moments in which it is better to leave the problem alone for a while. "Take counsel of your pillow" is an old piece of advice. Allowing an inter val of rest to the problem and to ourselves, we may obtain more tomorrow with less effort. "If today will not, tomorrow may" is another old saying. But it is desirable not to set aside a problem to which we wish to come back later without the impression of some achievement; at least some little point should be settled, some aspect of the question somewhat elucidated when we quit working. Only such problems come back improved whose solu tion we passionately desire, or for which we have worked with great tension; conscious effort and tension seem to be necessary to set the subconscious work going. At any rate, it would be too easy if it were not so; we could solve difficult problems just by sleeping and waiting for a bright idea. Past ages regarded a sudden good idea as an inspira- Symmetry 199 tion, a gift of the gods. You must deserve such a gift by work, or at least by a fervent wish.lO Symmetry has two meanings, a more usual, particular, geometric meaning, and a less usual, general, logical meamng. Elementary solid geometry considers two kinds of sym metry, symmetry with respect to a plane (called plane of symmetry), and symmetry with respect to a point (called center of symmetry). The human body appears to be fairly symmetrical but in fact it is not; many interior organs are quite unsymmetrically disposed. A statue may be completely symmetrical with respect to a vertical plane so that its two halves appear completely "inter changeable." In a more general acceptance of the word, a whole is termed symmetric if it has interchangeable parts. There are many kinds of symmetry; they differ in the number of interchangeable parts, and in the operations which exchange the parts. Thus, a cube has high symmetry; its 6 faces are interchangeable with each other, and so are its 8 vertices, and so are its 12 edges. The expression yz + zx + xy is symmetric; any two of the three letters x, y, z can be interchanged without changing the expression. Symmetry, in a general sense, is important for our subject. If a problem is symmetric in some ways we may derive some profit from noticing its interchangeable parts and it often pays to treat those parts which play the same role in the same fashion (see AUXILIARY ELE MENTS, 3)• 10 For an all-round discussion of "unconscious thinking" see Jacques Hadamard, The Psychology of Invention in the Mathemat ical Field. 200 Terms, Old and New Try to treat symmetrically what is symmetrical, and do not destroy wantonly any natural symmetry. However, we are sometimes compelled to treat unsymmetrically what is naturally symmetrical. A pair of gloves is cer tainly symmetrical; nevertheless, nobody handles the pair quite symmetrically, nobody puts on both gloves at the same time, but one after the other. Symmetry may also be useful in checking results; see section 14. Terms, old and new, describing the activity of solving problems are often ambiguous. The activity itself is familiar to everybody and it is often discussed but, as other mental activities, it is difficult to describe. In the absence of a systematic study there are no technical terms to describe it, and certain usual half-technical terms often add to the confusion because they are used in dif ferent meanings by different authors. The following short list includes a few new terms used and a few old terms avoided in the present study, and also some old terms retained despite their ambiguity. The reader may be confused by the following discus sion of terminology unless his notions are well anchored in examples. 1. Analysis is neatly defined by PAPPUS, and it is a use ful term, describing a typical way of devising a plan, starting from the unknown (or the conclusion) and working backwards, toward the data (or the hypothe sis). Unfortunately, the word has acquired very different meanings (for instance, of mathematical, chemical, logi cal analysis) and therefore, it is regretfully avoided in the present study. 2. Condition links the unknown of a "problem to find" to the data (see PROBLEMS TO FIND, PROBLEMS TO PROVE, 3) . In this meaning, it is a clear, useful and un- Terms, Old and New 201 avoidable term. It is often necessary to decompose the condition into several parts [into parts (I) and (II) in the examples DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBINING, 7• 8). Now, each part of the condition is usually called a condition. This ambiguity which is sometimes embarrassing could be easily avoided by introducing some technical term to denote the parts of the whole condition; for instance, such a part could be called a "clause." 3· Hypothesis denotes an essential part of a mathemat ical theorem of the more usual kind (see PROBLEMS TO FIND, PROBLEMS TO PROVE, 4) . The term, in this meaning, is perfectly clear and satisfactory. The difficulty is that each part of the hypothesis is also called a hypothesis so that the hypothesis may consist of several hypotheses. The remedy would be to call each part of the whole hypothesis a "clause," or something similar. (Compare the foregoing remark on "condition.") 4· Principal parts of a problem are defined in PROB LEMs TO FIND, PROBLEMS TO PROVE, 3• 4· 5· Problem to find, problem to prove are a pair of new terms, introduced regretfully to replace historical terms whose meaning, however, is confused beyond redemption by current usage. In Latin versions of Greek mathemati cal texts, the common name for both kinds of problems is "propositio"; a "problem to find" is called "problema," and a "problem to prove"
