# Auto Chapter 17

"theorema." In old-fashioned mathematical language, the words proposition, problem, theorem have still this "Euclidean" meaning, but this is completely changed in modern mathematical language; this justifies the introduction of new terms. 6. Progressive reasoning was used in various meanings by various authors, and in the old meaning of "synthesis" (see 9) by some authors. The latter usage is defensible but the term is avoided here. 7· Regressive reasoning was used in the old meaning of 202 Test by Dimension "analysis" by some authors (compare 1, 6). The term is defensible but avoided here. 8. Solution is a completely clear term if taken in its purely mathematical meaning; it denotes any object satis fying the condition of a "problem to find." Thus, the solutions of the equation x2 - 3x + 2 = o are its roots, the numbers 1 and 2. Unfortunately, the word has also other meanings which are not purely mathematical and which are used by mathematicians along with its mathe matical meaning. Solution may also mean the "process of solving the problem" or the "work done in solving the problem"; we use the word in this meaning when we talk about a "difficult solution." Solution may also mean the result of the work done in solving the problem; we may use the word in this meaning when we talk about a "beautiful solution." Now, it may happen that we have to talk in the same sentence about the object satisfying the condition of the problem, about the work of obtaining it, and about the result of this work; if we yield to the temp tation to call all three things "solution" the sentence cannot be too clear. g. Synthesis is used by PAPPUS in a well defined mean ing which would deserve to be conserved. The term is, however, regretfully avoided in the present study, for the same reasons as its counterpart "analysis" (see under 1 ). Test by dimension is a well-known, quick and efficient means to check geometrical or physical formulas. 1. In order to recall the operation of the test, let us consider the frustum of a right circular cone. Let R be the radius of the lower base, r the radius of the upper base, h the altitude of the frustum, S the area of the lateral surface of the frustum. If R, r, h are given, S is visibly determined. We find the Test by Dimension expression S = 1r(R + rhi(R- r)2 + h2 to which we wish to apply the test by dimension. The dimension of a geometric quantity is easily visible. Thus, R, r, h are lengths, they are measured in centi meters if we use scientific units, their dimension is em. The area S is measured in square centimeters, its dimen sion is em2. Now, 1r = 3.14159 ... is a mere number; if we wish to ascribe a dimension to a purely numerical quantity it must be emo = 1. Each term of a sum must have the same dimension which is also the dimension of the sum. Thus, R, r, and R + r have the same dimension, namely em. The two terms (R - r)2 and h2 have the same dimension (as they must), em2. The dimension of a product is the product of the di mensions of its factors, and there is a similar rule about powers. Replacing the quantities by their dimensions on both sides of the formula that we are testing, we obtain cm2 = I ·em ·ycm2• This being visibly so, the test could not detect any error in the formula. The formula passed the test. For other examples, see section 14, and CAN YOU CHECK THE RESULT? 2. 2. We may apply the test by dimension to the final result of a problem or to intermediary results, to our own work or to the work of others (very suitable in tracing mistakes in examination papers), and also to formulas that we recollect and to formulas that we guess. If you recollect the formulas 41r1'2 and 47r1's I 3 for the area and the volume of the sphere, but are not quite sure which is which, the test by dimension easily removes the doubt. 3· The test by dimension is even more important in physics than in geometry. Test by Dimension Let us consider a "simple" pendulum, that is, a small heavy body suspended by a wire whose length we regard as invariable and whose weight we regard as negligible. Let l stand for the length of the wire, g for the gravita tional acceleration, and T for the period of the pen dulum. Mechanical considerations show that T depends on l and g alone. But what is the form of the dependence? We may remember or guess that T = cZmgn where c, m, n are certain numerical constants. That is, we suppose that T is proportional to certain powers, zm, gn, of land g. We look at the dimensions. As T is a time, it is meas ured in seconds, its dimension is sec. The dimension of the length l is em, the dimension of the acceleration g is em sec-2, and the dimension of the numerical constant c is 1. The test by dimension yields the equation or sec = 1 • (cm)m (em sec-2)n sec= (cm)m+n sec-2n. Now, we must have the same powers of the funda mental units em and sec on both sides, and thus we obtain o=m+n 1 = -2n and hence n= 2 m = -· I 2 Therefore, the formula for the period T must have the form The Future Mathematician The test by dimension yields much in this case but it cannot yield everything. First, it gives no information about the value of the constant c (which is, in fact, 211) • Second, it gives no information about the limits of valid ity; the formula is valid only for small oscillations of the pendulum and only approximately (it is exact for "in finitely small" oscillations). In spite of these limitations, there is no doubt that the consideration of the dimen sions has allowed us to foresee quickly and with the most elementary means an essential part of a result whose exhaustive treatment demands much more advanced means. And this is so in many similar cases. The future mathematician should be a clever problem solver; but to be a clever problem-solver is not enough. In due time, he should solve significant mathematical problems; and first he should find out for which kind of problems his native gift is particularly suited. For him, the most important part of the work is to look back at the completed solution. Surveying the course of his work and the final shape of the solution, he may find an unending variety of things to observe. He may meditate upon the difficulty of the problem and about the decisive idea; he may try to see what hampered him and what helped him finally. He may look out for simple intuitive ideas: Can you see it at a glance? He may compare and develop various methods: Can you derive the result differently? He may try to clarify his present problem by comparing it to problems formerly solved; he may try to invent new problems which he can solve on the basis of his just completed work: Can you use the result, or the method, for some other problem? Digesting the problems he solved as completely as he can, he may acquire well ordered knowledge, ready to use. The future mathematician learns, as does everybody 206 The Intelligent Problem-solver else, by imitation and practice. He should look out for the right model to imitate. He should observe a stimu lating teacher. He should compete with a capable friend. Then, what may be the most important, he should read not only current textbooks but good authors till he finds one whose ways he is naturally inclined to imitate. He should enjoy and seek what seems to him simple or in structive or beautiful. He should solve problems, choose the problems which are in his line, meditate upon their solution, and invent new problems. By these means, and by all other means, he should endeavor to make his first important discovery: he should discover his likes and his dislikes, his taste, his own line. The intelligent problem-solver often asks himself ques tions similar to those contained in our list. He, perhaps, discovered questions of this sort by himself; or, having heard such a question from somebody, he discovered its proper use by himself. He is possibly not conscious at all that he repeats the same stereotyped question again and again. Or the question is his particular pet; he knows that the question is part of his mental attitude appropri ate in such and such a phase of the work, and he sum mons up the right attitude by asking the right question. The intelligent problem-solver may find the questions and suggestions of our list useful. He may understand quite well the explanations and examples illustrating a certain question, he may suspect the proper use of the question; but he cannot attain real understanding unless he comes across the procedure that the question tries to provoke in his own work and, by having experienced its usefulness, discovers the proper use of the question for himself. The intelligent problem-solver should be prepared to ask all questions of the list but he should ask none unless The Intelligent Reader he is prompted to do so by careful consideration of the problem at hand and by his own unprejudiced judgment. In fact, he must recognize by himself whether the present situation is sufficiently similar or not to some other situ ation in which he saw the question successfully applied. The intelligent problem-solver tries first of all to understand the problem as fully and as clearly as he can. Yet understanding alone is not enough; he must concen trate upon the problem, he must desire earnestly to obtain its solution. If he cannot summon up real desire for solving the problem he would do better to leave it alone. The open secret of real success is to throw your whole personality into your problem. The intelligent reader of a mathematical book desires two things: First, to see that the present step of the argument is correct. Second, to see the purpose of the present step. The intelligent listener to a mathematical lecture has the same wishes. If he cannot see that the present step of the argument is correct and even suspects that it is, possibly, incorrect, he may protest and ask a question. If he cannot see any purpose in the present step, nor sus pect any reason for it, he usually cannot even formulate a clear objection, he does not protest, he is just dismayed and bored, and loses the thread of the argument. The intelligent teacher and the intelligent author of textbooks should bear these points in mind. To write and speak correctly is certainly necessary; but it is not sufficient. A derivation correctly presented in the book or on the blackboard may be inaccessible and uninstruc tive, if the purpose of the successive steps is incompre hensible, if the reader or listener cannot understand how it was humanly possible to find such an argument, if he 208 The Traditional Mathematics Professor is not able to derive any suggestion from the presenta tion as to how he could find such an argument by himself. The questions and suggestions of our list may be use ful to the author and to the teacher in emphasizing the purpose and the motives of his argument. Particularly useful in this respect is the question: DID WE usE ALL THE DATA? The author or the teacher may show by this ques tion a good reason for considering the datum that has not been used heretofore. The reader or the listener can the same question in order to understand the use author's or the teacher's reason for considering such and such an element, and he may feel that, asking this ques tion, he could have discovered this step of the argument by himself. The traditional mathematics professor of the popular legend is absentminded. He usually appears in public with a lost umbrella in each hand. He prefers to face the blackboard and to turn his back on the class. He writes a, he says b, he means c; but it should be d. Some of his sayings are handed down from generation to generation. "In order to solve this differential equation you look at it till a solution occurs to you." "This principle is so perfectly general that no particu lar application of it is possible." "Geometry is the art of correct reasoning on incorrect figures." "My method to overcome a difficulty Is to go round it." "What is the difference between method and device? A method is a device which you use twice." After all, you can learn something from this traditional mathematics professor. Let us hope that the mathematics teacher from whom you cannot learn anything will not become tradi tiona!. Variation of the Problem Variation of the problem. An insect (as mentioned elsewhere) tries to escape through the windowpane, tries the same hopeless thing again and again, and does not try the next window which is open and through which it came into the room. A mouse may act more intelligently; caught in the trap, he tries to squeeze through between two bars, then between the next two bars, then between other bars; he varies his trials, he explores various pos sibilities. A man is able, or should be able, to vary his trials still more intelligently, to explore the various pos sibilities with more understanding, to learn by his errors and shortcomings. "Try, try again" is popular advice. It is good advice. The insect, the mouse, and the man follow it; but if one follows it with more success than the others it is because he varies his problem more intelli gently. 1. At the end of our work, when we have obtained the solution, our conception of the problem will be fuller and more adequate than it was at the outset. Desiring to proceed from our initial conception of the problem to a more adequate, better adapted conception, we try vari ous standpoints and we view the problem from different sides. Success in solving the problem depends on choosing the right aspect, on attacking the fortress from its ac cessible side. In order to find out which aspect is the right one, which side is accessible, we try various sides and aspects, we vary the problem. 2. Variation of the problem is essential. This fact can be explained in various ways. Thus, from a certain point of view, progress in solving the problem appears as mo bilization and organization of formerly acquired knowl edge. We have to extract from our memory and to work into the problem certain elements. Now, variation of the problem helps us to extract such elements. How? 210 Variation of the Problem We remember things by a kind of "action by contact," called "mental association"; what we have in our mind at present tends to recall what was in contact with it at some previous occasion. (There is no space and no need to state more neatly the theory of association, or to dis cuss its limitations.) Varying the problem, we bring in new points, and so we create new contacts, new possibili ties of contacting elements relevant to our problem. 3· We cannot hope to solve any worth-while problem without intense concentration. But we are easily tired by intense concentration of our attention upon the same point. In order to keep the attention alive, the object on which it is directed must unceasingly change. If our work progresses, there is something to do, there are new points to examine, our attention is occupied, our interest is alive. But if we fail to make progress, our at tention falters, our interest fades, we get tired of the problem, our thoughts begin to wander, and there is danger of losing the problem altogether. To escape from this danger we have to set ourselves a new question about the problem. The new question unfolds untried possibilities of con tact with our previous knowledge, it revives our hope of making useful contacts. The new question reconquers our interest. by varying the problem, by showing some new aspect of it. 4· Example. Find the volume of the frustum of a pyra mid with square base, being given the side of the lower base a, the side of the upper base b, and the altitude of the frustum h. The problem may be proposed to a class familiar with the formulas for the volume of prism and pyramid. If the students do not come forward with some idea of their own, the teacher may begin with varying the data of the problem. We start from a frustum with a> b. What Variation of the Problem 211 happens when b increases till it becomes equal to a? The frustum becomes a prism and the volume in question becomes a2h. What happens when b decreases till it becomes equal to o? The frustum becomes a pyramid and the volume in question becomes a2hl3· This variation of the data contributes, first of all, to the interest of the problem. Then, it may suggest using, in some way or other, the results quoted about prism and pyramid. At any rate, we have found definite properties of the final result; the final formula must be such that it reduces to a2h forb= a and to a2h/3 forb = o. It is an advantage to foresee properties of the result we are try ing to obtain. Such properties may give valuable sugges tions and, in any case, when we have found the final formula we shall be able to test it. We have thus, in advance, an answer to the question: CAN YOU CHECK THE RESULT? (See there, under 2.) 5· Example. Construct a trapezoid being given its four sides a, b, c, d. Let a be the lower base and c the upper base; a and c are parallel but unequal, b and d are not parallel. If there is no other idea, we may begin with varying the data. We start from a trapezoid with a> c. What happens when c decreases till it becomes equal too? The trapezoid degenerates into a triangle. Now a triangle is a familiar and simple figure, which we can construct from various data; there could be some advantage in introducing this triangle into the figure. We do so by drawing just one auxiliary line, a diagonal of the trapezoid (Fig. 21) . Ex amining the triangle we find however that it is scarcely useful; we know two sides, a and d, but we should have three data. Let us try something else. What happens when c in creases till it becomes equal to a? The trapezoid becomes 212 Variation of the Problem .. .. .. c .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 0 FIG. 21 a parallelogram. Could we use it? A little examination (see Fig. 22) directs our attention to the triangle which we have added to the original trapezoid when drawing the parallelogram. This triangle is easily constructed; we know three data, its three sides b~ d~ and a - c. -------"\:· ....................... -.. .. e .. / I I I / ' . I / ._ __________ 0~------------~ I FIG. 22 Varying the original problem (construction of the trapezoid) we have been led to a more accessible aux iliary problem (construction of the triangle) . Using the result of the auxiliary problem we easily solve our orig inal problem (we have to complete the parallelogram). Our example is typical. It is also typical that our first attempt failed. Looking back at it, we may see however that that first attempt was not so useless. There was some idea in it; in particular, it gave us an opportunity to think of the construction of a triangle as means to our end. In fact, we arrived at our second, successful trial by Variation of the Problem modifying our first, unsuccessful trial. We varied c; we first tried to decrease it, then to increase it. 6. As in the foregoing example, we often have to try various modifications of the problem. We have to vary, to restate, to transform it again and again till we succeed eventually in finding something useful. We may learn by failure; there may be some good idea in an unsuccessful trial, and we may arrive at a more successful trial by modifying an unsuccessful one. What we attain after various trials is very often, as in the foregoing example, a more accessible auxiliary problem. 7. There are certain modes of varying the problem which are typically useful, as going back to the DEFINI TION, DECOMPOSING AND RECOMBINING, introducing AUXIL IARY ELEMENTS, GENERALIZATION, SPECIALIZATION, and the use of ANALOGY. 8. What we said a while ago (under 3) about new questions which may reconquer our interest is important for the proper use of our list. A teacher may use the list to help his students. If the student progresses, he needs no help and the teacher should not ask him any questions, but allow him to work alone which is obviously better for his independence. But the teacher should, of course, try to find some suitable question or suggestion to help him when he gets stuck. Because then there is danger that the student will get tired of his problem and drop it, or lose interest and make some stupid blunder out of sheer indifference. We may use the list in solving our own problems. To use it properly we proceed as in the former case. When our progress is satisfactory, when new remarks emerge spontaneously, it would be simply stupid to hamper our spontaneous progress by extraneous questions. But when our progress is blocked, when nothing occurs to us, there is danger that we may get tired of our problem. Then it 214 What Is the Unknown? is time to think of some general idea that could be help ful, of some question or suggestion of the list that might be suitable. And any question is welcome that has some chance of showing a new aspect of the problem; it may reconquer our interest, it may keep us working and thinking. What is the unknown? What is required? What do you want? What are you supposed to seek? What are the data? What is given? What have you? What is the condition? By what condition is the un known linked to the data? These questions may be used by the teacher to test the understanding of the problem; the student should be able to answer them clearly. Moreover, they direct the student's attention to the principal parts of a "problem to find," the unknown, the data, the condition. As the consideration of these parts may be necessary again and again, the questions may be often repeated in the later phases of the solution. (Examples in sections 8, 10, 18, 20; SETIING UP EQUATIONS, 3• 4; PRACTICAL PROBLEMS, 1; PUZZLEs; and elsewhere.) The questions are of the greatest importance for the problem-solver. He checks his own understanding of the problem, he focuses his attention on this or that prin cipal part of the problem. The solution consists essen tially in linking the unknown to the data. Therefore, the problem-solver has to focus those elements again and again, asking: What is the unknown? What are the data? The problem may have many unknowns, or the condi tion may have various parts which must be considered separately, or it may be desirable to consider some datum by itself. Therefore, we may use various modifications of our questions, as:
