# Auto Chapter 18

What are the unknowns? What is the first datum? What is the second datum? What are the Why Proofs? 215 various parts of the condition? What is the first clause of the condition? The principal parts of a "problem to prove" are the hypothesis and the conclusion, and the corresponding questions are: What is the hypothesis? What is the con clusion? We may need some variation of verbal expres sion or modification of these frequently useful questions as: What do you assume? What are the various parts of your assumption? (Example in section 19.) Why proofs? There is a traditional story about New ton: As a young student, he began the study of geometry, as was usual in his time, with the reading of the Elements of Euclid. He read the theorems, saw that they were true, and omitted the proofs. He wondered why anybody should take pains to prove things so evident. Many years later, however, he changed his opinion and praised Euclid. The story may be authentic or not, yet the question remains: Why should we learn, or teach, proofs? What is preferable: no proof at all, or proofs for everything, or some proofs? And, if only some proofs, which proofs? 1. Complete proofs. For a logician of a certain sort only complete proofs exist. 'What intends to be a proof must leave no gaps, no loopholes, no uncertainty what ever, or else it is no proof. Can we find complete proofs according to such a high standard in everyday life, or in legal procedure, or in physical science? Scarcely. Thus, it is difficult to understand how we could acquire the idea of such a strictly complete proof. We may say, with a little exaggeration, that humanity learned this idea from one man and one book: from Euclid and his Elements. In any case, the study of the elements of plane geometry yields still the best oppor tunity to acquire the idea of rigorous proof. 216 Why Proofs? Let us take as an example the proof of the theorem: In any triangle, the sum of the three angles is equal to two right angles.ll Fig. 23, which is an inalienable mental property of most of us, needs little explanation. There is a line through the vertex A parallel to the side B C. A FIG. 23 The angles of the triangle at B and at C are equal to ce.:' tain angles at A, as is emphasized in the figure, since alternate angles are equal in general. The three angles of the triangle are equal to three angles with a common vertex A, forming a straight angle, or two right angles; and so the theorem is proved. If a student has gone through his mathematics classes without having really understood a few proofs like the foregoing one, he is entitled to address a scorching re proach to his school and to his teachers. In fact, we should distinguish between things of more and less im portance. If the student failed to get acquainted with this or that particular geometric fact, he did not miss so much; he may have little use for such facts in later life. But if he failed to get acquainted with geometric proofs, he missed the best and simplest examples of true evi dence and he missed the best opportunity to acquire the 11 Part of Proposition 32 of Book I of Euclid's Elements. The following proof is not Euclid's, but was known to the Greeks. Why Proofs? 217 idea of strict reasoning. Without this idea, he lacks a true standard with which to compare alleged evidence of all sorts aimed at him in modern life. In short, if general education intends to bestow on the student the ideas of intuitive evidence and logical rea soning, it must reserve a place for geometric proofs. 2. Logical system. Geometry, as presented in Euclid's Elements, is not a mere collection of facts but a logical system. The axioms, definitions, and propositions are not listed in a random sequence but disposed in accom plished order. Each proposition is so placed that it can be based on the foregoing axioms, definitions, and propo sitions. We may regard the disposition of the proposi tions as Euclid's main achievement and their logical system as the main merit of the Elements. Euclid's geometry is not only a logical system but it is the first and greatest example of such a system, which other sciences have tried, and are still trying, to imitate. Should other sciences-especially those very far from geom etry, as psychology, or jurisprudence-imitate Euclid's rigid logic? This is a debatable question; but nobody can take part in the debate with competence who is not acquainted with the Euclidean system. Now, the system of geometry is cemented with proofs. Each proposition is linked to the foregoing axioms, defi nitions, and propositions by a proof. Without under standing such proofs we cannot understand the very essence of the system. In short, if general education intends to bestow on the student the idea of logical system, it must reserve a place for geometric proofs. 3· Mnemotechnic system. The author does not think that the ideas of intuitive evidence, strict reasoning, and logical system are superfluous for anybody. There may be cases, however, in which the study of these ideas is not 218 Why Proofs? considered absolutely necessary, owing to lack of time, or for other reasons. Yet even in such cases proofs may be desirable. Proofs yield evidence; in so doing, they hold together the logical system; and they help us to remember the various items held together. Take the example discussed above, in connection with Fig. 23. This figure renders evident the fact that the sum of the angles in a triangle equals 180°. The figure connects this fact with the other fact that alternate angles are equal. Connected facts how ever are more interesting and are better retained than isolated facts. Thus, our figure fixes the two connected geometric propositions in our mind and, finally, the figure and the propositions may become our inalienable mental property. Now we come to the case in which the acquisition of general ideas is not regarded as necessary, only that of certain facts is desired. Even in such a case, the facts must be presented in some connection and in some sort of sys tem, since isolated items are laboriously acquired and easily forgotten. Any sort of connection that unites the facts simply, naturally, and durably, is welcome here. The system need not be founded on logic, it must only be designed to aid the memory effectively; it must be what is called a mnemotechnic system. Yet even from the point of view of a purely mnemotechnic system, proofs may be useful, especially simple proofs. For instance, the student must learn the fact about the sum of the angles in the triangle and that other fact about the alternate angles. Can any device to retain these facts be simpler, more natural or more effective than Fig. 23? In short, even when no special importance is attached to general logical ideas proofs may be useful as a mnemo technic device. 4· The cookbook system. We have discussed the advan tages of proofs but we certainly did not advocate that all Why Proofs? 219 proofs should be given "in extenso." On the contrary, there are cases in which it is scarcely possible to do so; an important case is the teaching of the differential and integral calculus to students of engineering. If the calculus is presented according to modern stand ards of rigor, it demands proofs of a certain degree of difficulty and subtlety ("epsilon-proofs") . But engineers study the calculus in view of its application and have neither enough time nor enough training or interest to struggle through long proofs or to appreciate subtleties. Thus, there is a strong temptation to cut out all the proofs. Doing so, however, we reduce the calculus to the level of the cookbook. The cookbook gives a detailed description of ingredi ents and procedures but no proofs for its prescriptions or reasons for its recipes; the proof of the pudding is in the eating. The cookbook may serve its purpose perfectly. In fact, it need not have any sort of logical or mnemo technic system since recipes are written or printed and not retained in memory. Yet the author of a textbook of calculus, or a college instructor, can hardly serve his purpose if he follows the system of the cookbook too closely. If he teaches proce dures without proofs, the unmotivated procedures are not understood. If he gives rules without reasons, the un connected rules are quickly forgotten. Mathematics can not be tested in exactly the same manner as a pudding; if all sorts of reasoning are debarred, a course of calculus may easily become an incoherent inventory of indigest ible information. 5· Incomplete proofs. The best way of handling the dilemma between too heavy proofs and the level of the cookbook may be to make reasonable use of incomplete proofs. For a strict logician, an incomplete proof is no proof at all. And, certainly, incomplete proofs ought to be 220 Why Proofs? carefully distinguished from complete proofs; to confuse one with the other is bad, to sell one for the other is worse. It is painful when the author of a textbook pre sents an incomplete proof ambiguously, with visible hesi tation between shame and the pretension that the proof is complete. But incomplete proofs may be useful when they are used in their proper place and in good taste. Their purpose is not to replace complete proofs, which they never could, but to lend interest and coherence to the presentation. Example 1. An algebraic equation of degree n has ex actly n roots. This proposition, called the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra by Gauss, must often be presented to students who are quite unprepared for understanding its proof. They know however that an equation of the first degree has one root, and one of the second degree two roots. Moreover the difficult proposition has a part that can be easily shown: no equation of degree n has more than n different roots. Do the facts mentioned con stitute a complete proof for the Fundamental Theorem? By no means. They are sufficient however to lend it a certain interest and plausibility-and to fix it in the minds of the students, which is the main thing. Example 2. The sum of any two of the plane angles formed by the edges of a trihedral angle is greater than the third. Obviously, the theorem amounts to affirming that in a spherical triangle the sum of any two sides is greater than the third. Having observed this, we nat urally think of the analogy of the spherical triangle with the rectilinear triangle. Do these remarks constitute a proof? By no means; but they help us to understand and to remember the proposed theorem. Our first example has historical interest. For about 250 years, the mathematicians believed the Fundamental Theorem without complete proof-in fact, without much more basis than what was mentioned above. Our second Wisdom of Proverbs 221 example points to ANALOGY as an important source of conjectures. In mathematics, as in the natural and physi cal sciences, discovery often starts from observation, analogy, and induction. These means, tastefully used in framing a plausible heuristic argument, appeal particu larly to the physicist and the engineer. (See also INDUC TION AND MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION, 1, 2, 3·) The role and interest of incomplete proofs is explained to a certain extent by our study of the process of the solu tion. Some experience in solving problems shows that the first idea of a proof is very frequently incomplete. The most essential remark, the main connection, the germ of the proof may be there, but details must be provided afterwards and are often troublesome. Some authors, but not many, have the gift of presenting just the germ of the proof, the main idea in its simplest form, and indicating the nature of the remaining details. Such a proof, al though incomplete, may be much more instructive than a proof presented with complete details. In short, incomplete proofs may be used as a sort of mnemotechnic device (but, of course, not as substitutes for complete proofs) when the aim is tolerable coherence of presentation and not strictly logical consistency. It is very dangerous to advocate incomplete proofs. Possible abuse, however, may be kept within bounds by a few rules. First, if a proof is incomplete, it must be in dicated as such, somewhere and somehow. Second, an author or a teacher is not entitled to present an incom plete proof for a theorem unless he knows very well a complete proof for it himself. And it may be confessed that to present an incomplete proof in good taste is not easy at all. Wisdom of proverbs. Solving problems is a fundamen tal human activity. In fact, the greater part of our con scious thinking is concerned with problems. When we 222 Wisdom of Proverbs do not indulge in mere musing or daydreaming, our thoughts are directed toward some end; we seek means, we seek to solve a problem. Some people are more and others less successful in attaining their ends and solving their problems. Such differences are noticed, discussed, and commented upon, and certain proverbs seem to have preserved the quintes sence of such comments. At any rate, there are a good many proverbs which characterize strikingly the typical procedures followed in solving problems, the points of common sense involved, the usual tricks, and the usual errors. There are many shrewd and some subtle remarks in proverbs but, obviously, there is no scientific system free of inconsistencies and obscurities in them. On the contrary, many a proverb can be matched with another proverb giving exactly opposite advice, and there is a great latitude of interpretation. It would be foolish to regard proverbs as an authoritative source of universally applicable wisdom but it would be a pity to disregard the graphic description of heuristic procedures provided by proverbs. It could be an interesting task to collect and group proverbs about planning, seeking means, and choosing between lines of action, in short, proverbs about solving problems. Of the space needed for such a task only a small fraction is available here; the best we can do is to quote a few proverbs illustrating the main phases of the solution emphasized in our list, and discussed in sections 6 to 14 and elsewhere. The proverbs quoted will be printed in italics. 1. The very first thing we must do for our problem is to understand it: Who understands ill, answers ill. We must see clearly the end we have to attain: Think on the end before you begin. This is an old piece of advice; "respice finem" is the saying in Latin. Unfortunately, not everybody heeds such good advice, and people often start Wisdom of Proverbs 223 speculating, talking, and even acting fussily without hav ing properly understood the aim for which they should work. A fool looks to the beginning, a wise man regards the end. If the end is not clear in our mind, we may easily stray from the problem and drop it. A wise man begins in the end, a fool ends in the beginning. Yet it is not enough to understand the problem, we must also desire its solution. We have no chance to solve a difficult problem without a strong desire to solve it, but with such desire there is a chance. Where there is a will there is a way. 2. Devising a plan, conceiving the idea of an appro priate action, is the main achievement in the solution of a problem. A good idea is a piece of good fortune, an inspiration, a gift of the gods, and we have to deserve it: Diligence is the mother of good luck. Perseverance kills the game. An oak is not felled at one stroke. If at first you don't suc ceed, try, try again. It is not enough however to try re peatedly, we must try different means, vary our trials. Try all the keys in the bunch. Arrows are made of all sorts of wood. We must adapt our trials to the circum stances. As the wind blows you must set your sail. Cut your coat according to the cloth. We must do as we may if we can't do as we would. If we have failed, we must try something else. A wise man changes his mind, a fool never does. We should even be prepared from the outset for a possible failure of our scheme and have another one in reserve. Have two strings to your bow. We may, of course, overdo this sort of changing from one scheme to another and lose time. Then we may hear the ironical comment: Do and undo, the day is long enough. We are likely to blunder less if we do not lose sight of our aim. The end of fishing is not angling but catching. We work hard to extract something helpful from our memory, yet, quite often, when an idea that could be 224 Wisdom of Proverbs helpful presents itself, we do not appreciate it, for it is so inconspicuous. The expert has, perhaps, no more ideas than the inexperienced, but appreciates more what he has and uses it better. A wise man will make more oppor tunities than he finds. A wise man will make tools of what comes to hand. A wise man turns chance into good fortune. Or, possibly, the advantage of the expert is that he is continually on the lookout for opportunities. Have an eye to the main chance. 3· We should start carrying out our plan at the right moment, when it is ripe, but not before. We should not start rashly. Look before you leap. Try before you trust. A wise delay makes the road safe. On the other hand, we should not hesitate too long. If you will sail without danger you must never put to sea. Do the likeliest and hope the best. Use the means and God will give the blessing. We must use our judgment to determine the right moment. And here is a timely warning that points out the most common fallacy, the most usual failure of our judgment: We soon believe what we desire. Our plan gives usually but a general outline. We have to convince ourselves that the details fit into the outline, and so we have to examine carefully each detail, one after the other. Step after step the ladder is ascended. Little by little as the cat ate the fiickle. Do it by de grees. In carrying out our plan we must be careful to arrange its steps in the proper order, which is frequently just the reverse of the order of invention. What a fool does at last, a wise man does at first. 4· Looking back at the completed solution is an im portant and instructive phase of the work. He thinks not well that thinks not again. Second thoughts are best. Reexamining the solution, we may discover an addi tional confirmation of the result. Yet it must be pointed Working Backwards 225 out to the beginner that such an additional confirmation is valuable, that two proofs are better than one. It is safe riding at two anchors. 5· We have by no means exhausted the comments of proverbs on the solution of problems. Yet many other proverbs which could be quoted would scarcely furnish new themes, only variations on the themes already men tioned. Certain more systematic and more sophisticated aspects of the process of solution are hardly within the scope of the Wisdom of Proverbs. In describing the more systematic aspects of the solu tion, the author tried now and then to imitate the pecul iar turn of proverbs, which is not easy. Here follow a few "synthetic" proverbs which describe somewhat more sophisticated attitudes. The end suggests the means. Your five best friends are What, Why, Where, When, and How. You ask What, you ask Why, you ask Where, When, and How-and ask nobody else when you need advice. Do not believe anything but doubt only what is worth doubting. Look around when you have got your first mushroom or made your first discovery; they grow in clusters. Working backwards. If we wish to understand human behavior we should compare it with animal behavior. Animals also "have problems" and "solve problems." Experimental psychology has made essential progress in the last decades in exploring the "problem-solving" activ ities of various animals. We cannot discuss here these investigations but we shall describe sketchily just one simple and instructive experiment and our description will serve as a sort of comment upon the method of analy sis, or method of "working backwards." This method, by the way, is discussed also elsewhere in the present book, Working Backwards under the name of PAPPUS to whom we owe an important description of the method. 1. Let us try to find an answer to the following tricky question: How can you bring up from the river exactly six quarts of water when you have only two containers, a four quart pail and a nine quart pail, to measure with? Let us visualize clearly the given tools we have to work with, the two containers. (What is given?) We imagine two cylindrical containers having equal bases whose altitudes are as g to 4, see Fig. 24. If along the lateral sur- FIG. 24 face of each container there were a scale of equally spaced horizontal lines from which we could tell the height of the waterline, our problem would be easy. Yet there is no such scale and so we are still far from the solution. We do not know yet how to measure exactly 6 quarts; but could we measure something else? (If you cannot solve the proposed problem try to solve first some related problem. Could you derive something useful from the data?) Let us do something, let us play around a little. We could fill the larger container to full capacity and empty so much as we can into the smaller container; then we could get 5 quarts. Could we also get 6 quarts? Here are again the two empty containers. \Ve could also ..• We are working now as most people do when con fronted with this puzzle. We start with the two empty Working Backwards containers, we try this and that, we empty and fill, and when we do not succeed, we start again, trying something else. We are working forwards, from the given initial situation to the desired final situation, from the data to the unknown. We may succeed, after many trials, acci dentally. 2. But exceptionally able people, or people who had the chance to learn in their mathematics classes some thing more than mere routine operations, do not spend too much time in such trials but turn around, and start working backwards. What are we required to do? (What is the unknown?) Let us visualize the final situation we aim at as clearly as possible. Let us imagine that we have here, before us, u FIG. 25 the larger container with exactly 6 quarts in it and the smaller container empty as in Fig. 25. (Let us start from what is required and assume what is sought as already found, says Pappus.) From what foregoing situation could we obtain the desired final situation shown in Fig. 25? (Let us inquire from what antecedent the desired result could be derived, says Pappus.) We could, of course, fill the larger con tainer to full capacity, that is, to 9 quarts. But then we should be able to pour out exactly three quarts. To do 228 Working Backwards that ... we must have
