# Auto Chapter 19

just one quart in the smaller con tainer! That's the idea. See Fig. 26. (The step that we have just completed is not easy at all. Few persons are able to take it without much fore going hesitation. In fact, recognizing the significance of this step, we foresee an outline of the following solu tion.) FIG. 26 But how can we reach the situation that we have just found and illustrated by Fig. 26? (Let us inquire again what could be the antecedent of that antecedent.) Since the amount of water in the river is, for our purpose, un limited, the situation of Fig. 26 amounts to the same as the next one in Fig. 27 FIG. 27 or the following in Fig. 28. Working Backwards 229 u FIG. 28 It is easy to recognize that if any one of the situations in Figs. 26, 27, 28 is obtained, any other can be obtained just as well, but it is not so easy to hit upon Fig. 28, unless we have seen it before) encountered it accidentally in one of our initial trials. Playing around with the two containers, we may have done something similar and re member now, in the right moment, that the situation of Fig. 28 can arise as suggested by Fig. 29: We fill the large u FIG. 29 container to full capacity, and pour from it four quarts into the smaller container and then into the river, twice in succession. We came eventually upon something al ready known (these are Pappus's words) and following the method of analysis, working backwards) we have dis covered the appropriate sequence of operations. Working Backwards It is true, we have discovered the appropriate sequence in retrogressive order but all that is left to do is to reverse the process and start from the point which we reached last of all in the analysis (as Pappus says). First, we perform the operations suggested by Fig. 29 and ob tain Fig. 28; then we pass to Fig. 27, then to Fig. 26, and finally to Fig. 25. Retracing our steps, we finally succeed in deriving what was required. 3· Greek tradition attributed to Plato the discovery of the method of analysis. The tradition may not be quite reliable but, at any rate, if the method was not invented by Plato, some Greek scholar found it necessary to attribute its invention to a philosophical genius. There is certainly something in the method that is not superficial. There is a certain psychological difficulty in turning around, in going away from the goal, in working backwards, in not following the direct path to the desired end. When we discover the sequence of appropriate oper ations, our mind has to proceed in an order which is exactly the reverse of the actual performance. There is some sort of psychological repugnance to this reverse order which may prevent a quite able student from un derstanding the method if it is not presented carefully. Yet it does not take a genius to solve a concrete prob lem working backwards; anybody can do it with a little common sense. We concentrate upon the desired end, we visualize the final position in which we would like to be. From what foregoing position could we get there? It is natural to ask this question, and in so asking we work backwards. Quite primitive problems may lead naturally to working backwards; see PAPPUS, 4· Working backwards is a common-sense procedure within the reach of everybody and we can hardly doubt that it was practiced by mathematicians and nonmathe maticians before Plato. What some Greek scholar may Working Backwards have regarded as an achievement worthy of the genius of Plato is to state the procedure in general terms and to stamp it as an operation typically useful in solving mathematical and nonmathematical problems. 4· And now, we turn to the psychological experiment if the transition from Plato to dogs, hens, and chimpan zees is not too abrupt. A fence forms three sides of a rectangle but leaves open the fourth side as shown in Fig. 30. We place a dog on one side of the fence, at the F 0 G .. , ................. . • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • D (!) FIG. 30 point D, and some food on the other side, at the point F. The problem is fairly easy for the dog. He may first strike a posture as if to spring directly at the food but then he quickly turns about, dashes off around the end of the fence and, '!'unning without hesitation, reaches the food in a smooth curve. Sometimes, however, especially when the points D and F are close to each other, the solution is not so smooth; the dog may lose some time in barking, scratching, or jumping against the fence before he "con ceives the bright idea" (as we would say) of going around. It is interesting to compare the behavior of various ani- Working Backwards mals put into the place of the dog. The problem is very easy for a chimpanzee or a four-year-old child (for whom a toy may be a more attractive lure than food). The prob lem, however, turns out to be surprisingly difficult for a hen who runs back and forth excitedly on her side of the fence and may spend considerable time before getting at the food if she gets there at all. But she may succeed, after much running, accidentally. 5· We should not build a big theory upon just one simple experiment which was only sketchily reported. Yet there can be no disadvantage in noticing obvious analogies provided that we are prepared to recheck and revalue them. Going around an obstacle is what we do in solving any kind of problem; the experiment has a sort of symbolic value. The hen acted like people who solve their prob lem muddling through, trying again and again, and suc ceeding eventually by some lucky accident without much insight into the reasons for their success. The dog who scratched and jumped and barked before turning around solved his problem about as well as we did ours about the two containers. Imagining a scale that shows the waterline in our containers was a sort of almost useless scratching, showing only that what we seek lies deeper under the surface. We also tried to work forwards first, and came to the idea of turning round afterwards. The dog who, after brief inspection of the situation, turned round and dashed off gives, rightly or wrongly, the im pression of superior insight. No, we should not even blame the hen for her clumsi ness. There is a certain difficulty in turning round, in going away from the goal, in proceeding without looking continually at the aim, in not following the direct path to the desired end. There is an obvious analogy between her difficulties and our difficulties. PART IV. PROBLEMS, HINTS, SOLUTIONS This last part offers the reader additional opportunity for practice. The problems require no more preliminary knowledge than the reader could have acquired from a good high school curriculum. Yet they are not too easy and not mere routine problems; some of them demand originality and ingenuity.12 The hints offer indications leading to the result, mostly by quoting an appropriate sentence from the list; to a very attentive reader ready to pick up suggestions they may reveal the key idea of the solution. The solutions bring not only the answer but also the procedure leading to the answer, although, of course, the reader has to supply some of the details. Some solutions try to open up some further outlook by a few words placed at the end. The reader who has earnestly tried to solve the prob lem has the best chance to profit by the hint and the solution. If he obtains the result by his own means, he may learn something by comparing his method with the method given in print. If, after a serious effort, he is inclined to give up, the hint may supply him with the 12 Except Problem 1 (widely known, but too amusing to miss) all the problems are taken from the Stanford University Competitive Examinations in Mathematics (there are a few minor changes) . Some of the problems were formerly published in The American Mathematical Monthly and/or The California Mathematics Coun cil Bulletin. In the latter periodical also some solutions were published by the author; they appear appropriately rearranged in the sequel. 233 234 Problems, Hints, Solutions missing idea. If even the hint does not help, he may look at the solution, try to isolate the key idea, put the book aside, and then try to work out the solution. PROBLEMS 1. A bear, starting from the point P, walked one mile due south. Then he changed direction and walked one mile due east. Then he turned again to the left and walked one mile due north, and arrived exactly at the point P he started from. What was the color of the bear? 2. Bob wants a piece of land, exactly level, which has four boundary lines. Two boundary lines run exactly north-south, the two other:; exactly east-west, and each boundary line measures exactly 100 feet. Can Bob buy such a piece of land in the U.S.? 3· Bob has 10 pockets and 44 silver dollars. He wants to put his dollars into his pockets so distributed that each pocket contains a different number of dollars. Can he do so? 4· To number the pages of a bulky volume, the printer used 2g8g digits. How many pages has the volume? 5· Among Grandfather's papers a bill was found: 72 turkeys $_67·9- The first and last digit of the number that obviously represented the total price of those fowls are replaced here by blanks, for they have faded and are now illegible. What are the two faded digits and what was the price of one turkey? 6. Given a regular hexagon and a point in its plane. Draw a straight line through the given point that divides the given hexagon into two parts of equal area. 7· Given a square. Find the locus of the points from Problems 235 which the square is seen under an angle (a) of go 0 (b) of 45°. (Let P be a point outside the square, but in the same plane. The smallest angle with vertex P con taining the square is the "angle under which the square is seen" from P.) Sketch clearly both loci and give a full description. 8. Call "axis" of a solid a straight line joining two points of the surface of the solid and such that the solid, rotated about this line through an angle which is greater than 0° and less than 360° coincides with itself. Find the axes of a cube. Describe clearly the location of the axes, find the angle of rotation associated with each. Assuming that the edge of the cube is of unit length, compute the arithmetic mean of the lengths of the axes. g. In a tetrahedron (which is not necessarily regular) two opposite edges have the same length a and they are perpendicular to each other. Moreover they are each per pendicular to a line of length b which joins their mid points. Express the volume of the tetrahedron in terms of a and b, and prove your answer. 10. The vertex of a pyramid opposite the base is called the apex. (a) Let us call a pyramid "isosceles" if its apex is at the same distance from all vertices o£ the base. Adopting this definition, prove that the base of an isosceles pyramid is inscribed in a circle the center of which is the foot of the pyramid's altitude. (b) Now let us call a pyramid "isosceles" if its apex is at the same (perpendicular) distance from all sides of the base. Adopting this definition (different from the foregoing) prove that the base of an isosceles pyramid is circumscribed about a circle the center of which is the foot of the pyramid's altitude. 11. Find x, y, u, and v, satisfying the system of four equations Problems, Hints, Solutions X+ 7Y + 3V + 5U = 16 8x + 4Y + 6v + 2U = -16 2X + 6y + 4V + 8u = 16 5X + 3Y + 7V + U = - 16 (This may look long and boring: look for a short cut.) 12. Bob, Peter, and Paul travel together. Peter and Paul are good hikers; each walk p miles per hour. Bob has a bad foot and drives a small car in which two people can ride, but not three; the car covers c miles per hour. The three friends adopted the following scheme: They start together, Paul rides in the car with Bob, Peter walks·. After a while, Bob drops Paul, who walks on; Bob returns to pick up Peter, and then Bob and Peter ride in the car till they overtake Paul. At this point they change: Paul rides and Peter walks just as they started and the whole procedure is repeated as often as necessary. (a) How much progress (how many miles) does the company make per hour? (b) Through which fraction of the travel time does the car carry just one man? (c) Check the extreme cases p = o and p =c. 13. Three numbers are in arithmetic progression, three other numbers in geometric progression. Adding the cor responding terms of these two progressions successively, we obtain respectively, and, adding all three terms of the arith metic progression, we obtain 126. Find the terms of both progressions. 14· Determine m so that the equation in x x4 - (3m+ 2)x2 + m2 = o has four real roots in arithmetic progression. Problems 237 15. The length of the perimeter of a right triangle is 6o inches and the length of the altitude perpendicular to the hypotenuse is 12 inches. Find the sides. 16. From the peak of a mountain you see two points, A and B, in the plain. The lines of vision, directed to these points, include the angle Y· The inclination of the first line of vision to a horizontal plane is a, that of the second line (3. It is known that the points A and B are on the same level and that the distance between them is c. Express the elevation x of the peak above the common level of A and B in terms of the angles a, (3, y, and the distance c. 17. Observe that the value of I 2 3 n 2! + 3! + 4! + · · · + (n + 1)! is 1/2, 5/6, 23/24 for n = 1,2,3, respectively, guess the general law (by observing more values if necessary) and prove your guess. 18. Consider the table I - - - - 3 + 5 7 + 9 + I I I 3 + I 5 + I 7 + I 9 I 8 27 64 2I + 23 + 25 + 27 + 29 = 125 Guess the general law suggested by these examples, ex press it in suitable mathematical notation, and prove it. 19. The side of a regular hexagon is of length n (n is an integer). By equidistant parallels to its sides the hexa gon is divided into T equilateral triangles each of which has sides of length 1. Let V denote the number of vertices appearing in this division, and L the number of bound ary lines of length 1. (A boundary line belongs to one or two triangles, a vertex to two or more triangles.) When Problems, Hints, Solutions n = 1, which is the simplest case, T = 6, V = 7, L = 12. Consider the general case and express T, V, and L in terms of n. (Guessing is good, proving is better.) 20. In how many ways can you change one dollar? (The "way of changing" is determined if it is known how many coins of each kind-cents, nickels, dimes, quarters, half dollars-are used.) HINTS 1. What is the unknown? The color of a bear-but how could we find the color of a bear from mathematical data? What is given? A geometrical situation-but it seems self-contradictory: how could the bear, after walk ing three miles in the manner described, return to his starting point? 2. Do you know a related problem? 3· If Bob had very many dollars, he would have obvi ously no difficulty in filling each of his pockets differently. Could you restate the problem? What is the minimum number of dollars that can be put in 10 pockets so that no two different pockets contain the same amount? 4· Here is a problem related to yours: If the book has exactly 9 numbered pages, how many digits uses the printer? (9, of course.) Here is another problem related to yours: If the book has exactly 99 numbered pages, how many digits does the printer use? 5· Could you restate the problem? What can the two faded digits be if the total price, expressed in cents, is divisible by 72? 6. Could you imagine a more accessible related prob lem? A more general problem? An analogous problem? (GENERALIZATION, 2.) 7· Do you know a related problem? The locus of the points from which a given segment of a straight line is Hints 239 seen under a given angle consists of two circular arcs, ending in the extreme points of the segment, and sym metric to each other with respect to the segment. 8. I assume that the reader is familiar with the shape of the cube and has found certain axes just by inspection -but are they all the axes? Can you prove that your list of axes is exhaustive? Has your list a clear principle of classification? g. Look at the unknown! The unknown is the volume of a tetrahedron-yes, I know, the volume of any pyramid can be computed when the base and the height are given (product of both, divided by 3) but in the present case neither the base nor the height is given. Could you imagine a more accessible related problem? (Don't you see a more accessible tetrahedron which is an aliquot part of the given one?) 10. Do you know a related theorem? Do you know a related ... simpler ... analogous theorem? Yes: the foot of the altitude is the mid-point of the base in an isosceles triangle. Here is a theorem related to yours and proved before. Could you use ... its method? The theorem on the isosceles triangle is proved from congruent right triangles of which the altitude is a common side. 11. It is assumed that the reader is somewhat familiar with systems of linear equations. To solve such a system, we have to combine its equations in some way-look out for relations between the equations which could indicate a particularly advantageous combination. 12. Separate the various parts of the condition. Can you write them down? Between the start and the point where the three friends meet again there are three dif ferent phases: (1) Bob rides with Paul (2) Bob rides alone (3) Bob rides with Peter. Problems, Hints, Solutions Call t 1 , t2 , and t3 the durations of these phases, respec tively. How could you split the condition into appro priate parts? 13. Separate the various parts of the condition. Can you write them down? Let a-d, a, a+d be the terms of the arithmetic progression, and b, bg be the terms of the geometric progression. 14. What is the condition? The four roots must form an arithmetic progression. Yet the equation has a par ticular feature: it contains only even powers of the un known x. Therefore, if a is a root, -a is also a root. 15. Separate the various parts of the condition. Can you write them down? We may distinguish three parts in the condition, concerning ( 1) perimeter (2) right triangle (3) height to hypotenuse. 16. Separate the various parts of the condition. Can you write them down? Let a and b stand for the lengths of the (unknown) lines of vision, a and {3 for their in clinations to the horizontal plane, respectively. We may distinguish three parts in the condition, concerning ( 1) the inclination of a (2) the inclination of b (3) the triangle with sides a, b, and c. 17. Do you recognize the denominators 2, 6, 24? Do you know a related problem? An analogous problem? (INDUCTION AND MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION.) Hints 241 18. Discovery by induction needs observation. Observe the right-hand sides, the initial terms of the left-hand sides, and the final terms. What is the general law? 19. Draw a figure. Its observation may help you to dis cover the law inductively, or it may lead you to relations between T, V, L, and n. 20. What is the unknown? What are we supposed to seek? Even the aim of the problem may need some clari fication. Could you imagine a more accessible related problem? A more general problem? An analogous prob lem? Here is a very simple analogous problem: In how many ways can you pay one cent? (There is just one way.) Here is a more general problem: In how many ways can you pay the amount of n cents using these five kinds of coins: cents, nickels, dimes, quarters, and half dollars. We are especially concerned with the particular case n = 100. In the simplest particular cases, for small n, we can figure out the answer without any high-brow method, just by trying, by inspection. Here is a short table (which the reader should check). n459 10 2 4 En 1 2 14 4 15 19 20 24 25 9 6 13 9 6 The first line lists the amounts to be paid, generally called n. The second line lists the corresponding num bers of "ways of paying," generally called En. (Why I have chosen this notation is a secret of mine which I am not willing to give away at this stage.) We are especially concerned with £ 100, but there is little hope that we can compute E 100 without some clear method. In fact the present problem requires a little more from the reader than the foregoing ones; he should create a little theory. Our question is general (to compute En for general n), Problems, Hints, Solutions but it is "isolated." Could you imagine a more accessible related problem? An analogous problem? Here is a very simple analogous problem: Find An, the number of ways to pay the amount of n cents, using only cents. (An = 1.) SOLUTIONS 1. You think that the bear was white and the point P is the North Pole? Can you prove that this is correct? As it was more or less understood, we idealize the question. We regard the globe as exactly spherical and the bear as a moving material point. This point, moving due south or due north, describes an arc of a meridian and it de scribes an arc of a parallel circle (parallel to the equator) when it moves due east. We have to distinguish two cases. ( 1) If the bear returns to the point P along a meridian different from the one along which he left P, P is neces sarily the North Pole. In fact the only other point of the globe in which two meridians meet is the South Pole, but the bear could leave this pole only in moving northward. (2) The bear could return to the point P along the same meridian he left P if, when walking one mile due east, he describes a parallel circle exactly n times, where n may be 1,
